I think it's possible that physics has exploits and we should be trying to find them. arranging some kind of a crazy quantum mechanical system that somehow gives you buffer overflow, somehow gives you a rounding error in the floating point. Synthetic intelligences are kind of like the next stage of development. And I don't know where it leads to. Like at some point, I suspect the universe is some kind of a puzzle. These synthetic AIs will uncover that puzzle and solve it. The following is a conversation with Andre Kappathi, previously the director of AI at Tesla. And before that, at OpenAI and Stanford, he is one of the greatest scientist engineers and educators in the history of artificial intelligence. This is the Lex Friedman podcast to support it. Please check out our sponsors and now to your friends. Here's Andre Kappathi. What is a neural network? And what does it seem to do such a surprisingly good job of learning? What is a neural network? It's a mathematical abstraction of the brain. I would say that's how it was originally developed. At the end of the day, it's a mathematical expression. And it's a fairly simple mathematical expression when you get down to it. It's basically a sequence of meter smoke applies, whichever link dot products mathematically. And some non-linearities throw them in. And so it's a very simple mathematical expression. And it's got knobs in it. Many knobs. Many knobs. And these knobs are loosely related to basically the synapses in your brain. They're trainable, they're modifiable. And so the idea is we need to find the setting of the knobs that makes the neural net do whatever you want it to do, like classify images and so on. And so there's not too much mystery I would say in it. Like you might think that basically don't want to end out with too much meaning with respect to the brain and how it works. It's really just a complicated mathematical expression with knobs. And those knobs need a proper setting for it to do something desirable. Yeah, but poetry is just the collection of letters with spaces. But it can make us feel a certain way. And in that same way, when you get a large number of knobs together, whether it's inside the brain or inside a computer, they seem to they seem to surprise us with their power. Yeah, I think that's fair. So basically I'm underselling it by a lot because you definitely do get very surprising emergent behaviors out of these neural nets when they're large enough and trained on complicated enough problems. Like say, for example, the next word prediction in a massive data set from the internet. And then these neural nets take on pretty surprising magical properties. Yeah, I think it's kind of interesting how much you can get out of even very simple mathematical formalism. When your brain right now is talking, is it doing next word prediction? Or is it doing something more interesting? Well, it's definitely some kind of a generative model that's a GPT-like and prompted by you. Yeah, so you're giving me a prompt and I'm kind of like responding to it in a generative way. And by yourself, perhaps a little bit like are you adding extra prompts from your own memory inside your head? Or no? Well, definitely feels like you're referencing some kind of a declarative structure of like memory and so on. And then you're putting that together with your prompt and giving away some extra. How much of what you just said has been said by you before? Nothing, basically, right? No, but if you actually look at all the words you've ever said in your life and you do a search, you'll probably said a lot of the same words in the same order before. Yeah, could be. I mean, I'm using phrases that are common, etc. But I'm remixing it into a pretty sort of unique sentence at the end of the day. But you're right, definitely, there's like a ton of remixing. Why you didn't, you just like Magnus Carlson said, I'm rated 2,900, whatever, which is pretty decent. I think you're talking very, you're not giving enough credit to neural nets here. Why do they seem to, what's your best intuition about this emergent behavior? I mean, it's kind of interesting because I'm simultaneously underselling them. But I also feel like there's an element to which I'm over like, it's actually kind of incredible that you can get so much emergent magical behavior out of them, despite them being so simple mathematically. So I think those are kind of like two surprising statements that are kind of just juxtaposed together. And I think basically what it is is we are actually fairly good at optimizing these neural nets. And when you give them a hard enough problem, they are forced to learn very interesting solutions in the optimization. And those solutions basically have these emergent properties that are very interesting. There's wisdom and knowledge in the knobs. And so this representation that's in the knobs doesn't make sense to you intuitively. The large number of knobs can hold a representation that captures some deep wisdom about the data. It has looked at a lot of knobs. It's a lot of knobs. And somehow, so speaking concretely, one of the neural nets that people are very excited about right now are our GPs, which are basically just next word prediction networks. So you consume a sequence of words from the internet and you try to predict the next word. And once you train these on a large enough data set, they you can basically prompt these neural nets in arbitrary ways and you can ask them to solve problems. And they will. So you can just tell them you can make it look like you're trying to solve some kind of mathematical problem and they will continue what they think is the solution based on what they've seen on the internet. And very often those solutions look very remarkably consistent. Look correct potentially. Do you still think about the brain side of it? So as neural nets is an abstraction or mathematical abstraction of the brain, you still draw wisdom from the biological neural networks or even the bigger question. So your big fan of biology and biological computation. What impressive thing is biology doing to you the computer, not yet, the gap? I would say I'm definitely on a much more hesitant with the analogies to the brain than I think he would see potentially in the field. And I kind of feel like certainly the way neural networks started is everything stemmed from inspiration by the brain. But at the end of the day, artifacts that you get after training, they are arrived at by a very different optimization process than the optimization process that gave rise to the brain. And so I think I kind of think of it as a very complicated alien artifact. It's something different. I'm sorry, the neural nets that were training. They are complicated alien artifact. I do not make analogies to the brain because I think the optimization process that gave rise to it is very different from the brain. So there was no multi agent, self play kind of setup and evolution. It was an optimization that is basically a, what amounts to a compression objective on a massive amount of data. Okay, so artificial neural networks are doing compression and biological neural networks. Now to survive. And I'm not really doing any of their, they're an agent in a multi agent, self play system that's been running for very, very long time. That said, evolution has found that it is very useful to, to predict and have a predictive model in the brain. And so I think our brain utilizes something that looks like that as a part of it. But it has a lot more, you know, catches and gizmos and value functions and ancient nuclei that are all trying to like make a survivor and reproduce and everything else. And the whole thing through embryogenesis is built from a single cell. I mean, it's just the code is inside the DNA and it just builds it up like the entire organism with the sound. Crazy. And the head and legs. Yes. And like it does it pretty well. It should not be possible. So there's some learning going on. There's some, there's some, there's some kind of computation going through that building process. I mean, I don't know where, if you were just to look at the entirety of history of life on Earth, what do you think is the most interesting invention? Is it the origin of life itself? Is it just jumping to eukaryotes? Is it mammals? Is it humans themselves, homo sapiens? Are the origin of intelligence or highly complex intelligence? Or is it all just a continuation of the same kind of process? Certainly, I would say it's an extremely remarkable story that I'm only like briefly learning about recently. All the way from, actually, like, you almost have to start at the formation of Earth and all of its conditions and the entire solar system and how everything is arranged with Jupiter and Moon and the habitable zone and everything. And then you have an active Earth that's turning over material. And then you start with a biogenesis and everything. And so it's all like a pretty remarkable story. I'm not sure that I can pick like a single unique piece of it that I find most interesting. I guess for me as an artificial intelligence researcher, it's probably the last piece. We have lots of animals that are not building technological society, but we do. And it seems to have happened very quickly. It seems to have happened very recently. And something very interesting happened there that I don't fully understand. I almost understand everything else, I think intuitively, but I don't understand exactly that part and how quick it was. Both explanations would be interesting. One is that this is just a continuation of the same kind of process. There's nothing special about humans. That would be deeply understanding that would be very interesting. That we think of ourselves as special, but it was obvious. All it was already written in the code that you would have greater and greater intelligence emerging. And then the other explanation, which is something truly special happened, something like a rare event, whether it's like crazy rare event, like space Odyssey. What would it be? See, if you say like the invention of fire, or the, as Richard and Rangham says, the beta males deciding a clever way to kill the alpha males by collaborating. So just optimizing the collaboration, the multi-agent aspect of the multi-agent. And that really being constrained on resources and trying to survive the collaboration aspect is what created the complex intelligence. But it seems like it's a natural algorithm to the evolution process. What could possibly be a magical thing that happened? Like a rare thing that would say that humans are actually human level intelligence, actually a really rare thing in the universe. Yeah, I'm hesitant to say that it is rare, by the way, but it definitely seems like it's kind of like a punctuated equilibrium where you have lots of exploration and then you have certain leaps, sparse leaps in between. So of course, like origin of life would be one, you know, DNA, sex, eukaryotic, eukaryotic life, the endosymbiosis event where the archaeon ate the old bacteria, you know, just the whole thing. And then of course, emergence of consciousness and so on. So it seems like definitely there are sparse events where mass amount of progress was made. But yeah, it's kind of hard to pick one. So you don't think humans are unique. You've got to ask you how many intelligent alien civilizations do you think are out there? And is there intelligence different or similar to ours? Yeah, I've been preoccupied with this question quite a bit recently, basically the Fermi Paradox and just thinking through. And the reason actually that I am very interested in the origin of life is fundamentally trying to understand how common it is that there are technological societies out there in space. And the more I study it, the more I think that there should be quite a lot. Why haven't we heard from them? Because I agree with you. It feels like I just don't see why what we did here and it's so difficult to do. Yeah, and especially when you get into the details of it, I used to think origin of life was very, it was this magical rare event, but then you read books like, for example, in the claim, the vital question, life ascending, etc. And he really gets in and he really makes you believe that this is not that rare basic chemistry. You have an activist and you have your alkaline vents and you have lots of alkaline waters, mixing with a devotion and you have your proton gradients and you have the little porous pockets of these alkaline vents that concentrate chemistry. And basically as he steps through all of these little pieces, you start to understand that actually this is not that crazy. You could see this happen on other systems. And he really takes you from just a geology to primitive life and he makes it feel like it's actually pretty plausible. And also like the origin of life didn't, was actually fairly fast after formation of Earth. If I'm recurrently just a few hundred million years for something like that after basically when it was possible, life actually arose. And so that makes me feel that that is not the constraint, that is not the limiting variable and that life should actually be fairly common. And then where the drop offs are is very interesting to think about. I currently think that there's no major drop offs basically and so there should be quite a lot of life. And basically where that brings me to then is the only way to reconcile the fact that we haven't found anyone and so on is that we just can't see them. We can't observe them. Just a quick brief comment, Nick Lane and a lot of biologists I talked to, they really seem to think that the jump from bacteria to more complex organisms is the hardest jump. The you carry it like this. Yeah, which I don't, I get it, they're much more knowledgeable than me about like the intricacies of biology. But that seems like crazy because how many single cell organisms are there? And how much time you have, surely, it's not that difficult. Like an ability in years is not even that long of a time really. Just all these bacteria under constrained resources battling it out. I'm sure they can invent more complex. I don't understand. It's like how to move from a hello world program to like invent a function or something like that. I don't yeah. So I don't, yeah, so I'm with you. I just feel like I don't see any. If the origin of life, that would be my intuition. That's the hardest thing. But if that's not the hardest thing because it happens so quickly, then it's got to be everywhere. And yeah, maybe we're just too dumb to see it. Well, it's just, we don't have really good mechanisms for seeing this life. I mean, by what how? So I'm not an expert just to preface this, but just from I want to meet an expert on alien intelligence and how to communicate. I'm very suspicious of our ability to to find these intelligence is out there and to find these Earth like radio waves, for example, are terrible. Their power drops off as basically one over our square. So I remember reading that our current radio waves would not be the ones that we are broadcasting would not be measurable by our devices today. Only like, was it like one tenth of a light year away? Like not even basically tiny distance because you really need like a targeted transmission of massive power directed somewhere for this to be picked up on long long distances. And so I just think that our ability to measure is is not amazing. I think there's probably other civilizations out there. And then the big question is why don't they build one element probes and why don't they interstellar travel across the entire galaxy? And my current answer is it's probably interstellar travel is like really hard. You have the interstellar medium. If you want to move at close to speed of light, you're going to be encountering bullets along the way because even like tiny hydrogen atoms and little particles of dust are basically have like massive kinetic energy at those speeds. And so basically you need some kind of shielding. You need that you have all the cosmic radiation. It's just like brutal out there. It's really hard. And so my thinking is maybe interstellar travel is just extremely hard. I think you have to do it very slow. It feels like we're not a billion years away from doing that. It just might be that it's very you have to go very slowly potentially as an example through space. Right. As opposed to close to speed of light. So I'm suspicious basically of our ability to measure life. And I'm suspicious of the ability to just permeate all of space in the galaxy or across galaxies. And that's the only way that I can certainly see away around it. Yeah, it's kind of mind blowing. I think that there's trillions of intelligent alien civilizations out there kind of slowly traveling through space. Mm-hmm. Made to meet each other and some of them meet some of them go to war some of them collaborate. Mm-hmm. Or they're all just independent. They general just like little pockets. Well, statistically if there's like if it's the trillions of them surely some of them some of the pockets are close enough to get some of them happen to be close. Yeah. And close enough to see each other. And then once you see once you see something that is definitely complex life like if we see something. Yeah. We're probably going to be severe like intensely aggressively motivated to figure out what the hell that is and try to meet them. Well, it will be your first instinct to try to like at a generational level. Meet them or defend against them or it will be your instinct as a president of the United States. And the scientist. I don't know which hat you prefer in this question. Yeah, I think the question it's really hard. I will say like for example for us we have lots of primitive life forms on earth. Next to us we have all kinds of ants and everything else and we share space with them. And we are hesitant to impact on them and to we are trying to protect them by default because they are amazing interesting dynamical systems that took a long time to evolve and they are interesting and special and I don't know that you want to destroy that by default. And so I like complex dynamical systems that took a lot of time to evolve. I think I'd like to preserve it if I can afford to. And I'd like to think that the same would be true about the galactic resources and that they would think that we're kind of incredible interesting story that took time. It took a few billion years to unravel and you don't want to just destroy it. I could see two aliens talking about earth right now and saying I'm a big fan of complex dynamical systems. So I think it's with a value to preserve these and we'll basically are a video game they watch or show a TV show that they watch. Yeah, I think you would need like a very good reason I think to destroy it. Like why don't we destroy these ant farms and so on? It's because we're not actually like really indirect competition with them right now. We do it accidentally and so on but there's plenty of resources. And so why would you destroy something that is so interesting and precious? Well, from a scientific perspective, you might probe it. You might interact with it lately. Exactly. You might want to learn something from it. So I wonder there's could be certain physical phenomena that we think is a physical phenomena but it's actually interacting with us to like poke the finger and see what happens. I think it should be very interesting to scientists. Other alien scientists what happened here. And you know, it's a what we're seeing today as a snapshot basically. It's a result of a huge amount of computation over like billion years or something like that. So it could have been initiated by aliens. This could be a computer running a program like when okay, if you had the power to do this, when you okay, for sure, at least I would, I would pick a earth-like planet that has the conditions based my understanding of the chemistry prerequisites for life. And I would see it with life and run it. Right? Like, yeah, when you 100% do that and observe it and then protect, I mean, that's not just the hell of a good TV show. It's a good scientific experiment. And it's physical simulation, right? Maybe the evolution is the most like actually running it is the most efficient way to understand computation or to compute stuff. For understand life or you know, what life looks like and what branches it can take. It does make me kind of feel weird there were part of a science experiment but maybe it's everything's a science experiment. Does that change anything for us? For a science experiment? I don't know. Two descendants of Apes talking about being inside of a science experiment. I'm suspicious of this idea of like a deliberate pens premiere as you described it. And I don't see a divine intervention in some way in the historical record right now. I do feel like the story in these books like Nikolai's books and so on sort of makes sense and it makes sense how life arose on earth uniquely. And yeah, I don't need a, I mean, I don't need to reach for more exotic explanations right now. Sure, but NPCs inside a video game don't don't observe any divine intervention either. We might just be all NPCs running a kind of code. Maybe eventually they will. Currently, NPCs are really dumb but once they're running GPs, maybe they will be like, hey, this is really suspicious with the hell. So you famously tweeted, it looks like if you bombard earth with photons for a while, you can emit a roaster. So if like an Hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy, we would summarize the story of earth. So in that book it's mostly harmless. What do you think is all the possible stories, like a paragraph long or a sentence long, that earth could be summarized as? At once it's done, it's computation. So like all the possible full, if earth is a book, right? Yeah. Probably there has to be an ending. I mean, there's going to be an end to earth and it could end in all kinds of ways. It can end soon. It can end later. What do you think are the possible stories? Well, definitely there seems to be, yeah, you're sort of, it's pretty incredible that the self-replicating systems will basically arise from the dynamics and then they perpetuate themselves and become more complex and eventually become conscious and build a society. And I kind of feel like in some sense it's kind of like a deterministic wave that kind of just happens on any sufficiently well-arranged system like earth. And so I kind of feel like there's a certain sense of inevitability in it. And it's really beautiful. And it ends somehow, right? So it's a chemically diverse environment where complex dynamical systems can evolve and become more further further complex. But then there's a certain, what is it? There's certain terminating conditions. Yeah, I don't know what the terminating conditions are, but definitely there's a trend line of something. And we're part of that story. And like, where does that, where does it go? So, you know, we're famously described often as a biological bootloader for AIs. And that's because humans, I mean, we're an incredible biological system and we're capable of computation and, you know, and love and so on. But we're extremely inefficient as well. Like we're talking to each other through audio. It's just kind of embarrassing, honestly, that we're manipulating like seven symbols, uh, serially, we're using vocal chords. It's all happening over like multiple seconds. It's just like kind of embarrassing when you step down to the frequencies at which computers operate or are able to operate on. And so basically, it does seem like, um, synthetic intelligences are kind of like the next stage of development. And, um, I don't know where it leads to like at some point, I suspect the universe is some kind of a puzzle. And these synthetic AIs will uncover that puzzle and solve it. And then what happens after, right? Like what? Because if you just like fast forward earth, many billions of years, it's like, it's quiet. And then it's like, to the terminal, you see like city lights and stuff like that. And then what happens at like at the end, like, is it like a pool? Or is it like a calming? Is it explosion? Is it like earth like open like a giant? Because you said, admit roasters like we'll start emitting like like a giant number of like satellites. Yes. It's some kind of a crazy explosion. And we're living, we're like, we're stepping through a explosion. And we're like living day to day and it doesn't look like it. But it's actually, if you, I saw a very cool animation of earth, uh, and life on earth and basically nothing happens for a long time. And then the last like two seconds, like basically cities and everything. And the lower orbit just gets cluttered. And just the whole thing happens in the last two seconds. And you're like, this is exploding. This is a statement explosion. So if you play, yeah, yeah, if you play at a normal speed, yeah, it'll just look like an explosion. It's a firecracker. We're living in a firecracker where it's going to start emitting all kinds of interesting things. Yeah. And then the explosion doesn't, it might actually look like a little explosion with lights and fire and energy emitted, all that kind of stuff. But when you look in the inside, the details of the explosion, there's actual complexity happening where there's like, yeah, human life or some kind of life. We hope it's another destructive firecracker. It's kind of like a constructive firecracker. All right. So given that, I think, uh, hilarious. It's going to be really interesting to think about like what the puzzle of the universe is. Did the creator of the universe give us a message? Like for example, in the book contact, um, Carl Sagan, uh, there's a message for humanity, for any civilization in the digits in the expansion of pie and base 11 eventually. We're just kind of interesting thought. Maybe, maybe we're supposed to be giving a message to our creator. Maybe we're supposed to somehow create some kind of a quantum mechanical system that alerts them to our intelligent presence here. Because if you think about it from their perspective, it's just say like quantum field theory, massive like cellular atomic bomb like thing. And like, how do you even notice that we exist? You might not even be able to pick us up in that simulation. And so how do you, uh, how do you prove that you exist, uh, that you're intelligent and that you're part of the universe? So this is like a touring test for intelligence from Earth. Yeah. So creators, uh, I mean, maybe this is like trying to complete the next origin and sense. This is a complicated way of that. Like Earth is just is basically sending a message back. Yeah. The puzzle is basically like alerting the creator that we exist. Yeah. Uh, or maybe the puzzle is just to, uh, just break out of the system and just, uh, you know, stick it to the creator in some way. Yeah. Basically, like if you're playing a video game, you can, um, you can somehow find an exploit and find a way to execute on the host machine, uh, in the arbitrary code. Uh, there's some, uh, for example, I believe someone got a Mario, a game of Mario to play pong just by, um, exploiting it and then, um, creating a, basically writing, writing code and being able to execute arbitrary code in the game. And so maybe we should be, maybe that's the puzzle is that we should be, um, uh, find a way to exploit it. So, so I think like some of these synthetic ares will eventually find the universe to be some kind of a puzzle and then solve it in some way. And that's kind of like the end game somehow. Do you often think about it as, uh, as a simulation? So, uh, as, or the universe being a kind of computation that has, might have bugs and exploits. Yes. Yeah. I think so. I think it's possible that physics has exploits and we should be trying to find them, uh, arranging some kind of a crazy quantum mechanical system that somehow gives you buffer overflow, uh, somehow gives you a rounding error in the floating point. Uh, uh, uh, yeah. That's right. And like more and more sophisticated exploits that those are jokes, but that could be actually, yeah, we'll find some way to extract infinite energy. Uh, for example, when you train reinforcement learning agents, um, in physical simulations and you ask them to say run quickly on the flat ground, they'll end up doing all kinds of like weird things, um, in part of that optimization, right? They'll get on their back leg and they'll slide across the floor. And it's because the optimization, um, the enforcement learning optimization on that agent has figured out a way to extract infinite energy from the friction forces and, um, basically their poor implementation and they found a way to generate infinite energy and just slide across the surface. And it's not what you expected. It's just a, it's sort of like a, perverse solution. And so maybe we can find something like that. Maybe we can be that little dog in this physical simulation. The, like, the cracks or escapes the intended consequences of the physics that universe came up with. Yeah. We'll figure out some kind of shortcut to some weirdness. Yeah. And then, man, you see the problem with that weirdness is the first person to discover the weirdness, like sliding in the back legs. That's all we're going to do. Yeah. It's very quickly become everybody does that thing. So like the paperclip maximizer is a ridiculous idea, but that very well, you know, could be what then we'll just, we'll just all switch that because it's so fun. Well, no person will discover it, I think, by the way, I think it's going to have to be, uh, some kind of a super intelligent AGI of a Thorpe generation. Like we're building the first generation AGI. And you know, third generation. Yeah. So the bootloader for an AI, that AI will be a bootloader for another AI. Yeah. And then there's no way for us to interest back like what that would have been. I think it's very likely that these things, for example, like say you have these AGIs, it's very likely that, for example, they will be completely inert. I like these kinds of sci-fi books sometimes where these things are just completely inert. They don't interact with anything. And I find that kind of beautiful because they probably, they've probably figured out the meta game of the universe in some way, potentially. They're, they're doing something completely beyond our imagination. And they don't interact with simple chemical life forms. Why would you do that? So I find those kinds of ideas compelling. What's their source of fun? What are they, what are they doing? What's the source of pleasure? Well, probably solving in the universe. But inert, so can you define what it means in nerds? So they escape the actual physics. They will behave in some very like strange way to us because they're beyond, they're playing the meta game. And the meta game is probably say like arranging quantum mechanical systems in some very weird ways to extract infinite energy, solve the digital expansion of pie to whatever amount they will build their own like little fusion reactors or something crazy. Like they're doing something beyond comprehension. And not understandable to us and actually brilliant under the hood. What if quantum mechanics itself is the system and we're just thinking it's physics. But we're really parasites on, on not parasite, we're not really hurting physics. We're just living on this organisms. This organism and we're like trying to understand it, but really it is an organism. And with a deep, deep intelligence, maybe physics itself is the organism that's doing the super interesting thing. And we're just like one little thing, yeah, and sitting on top of it, trying to get energy from it. We're just kind of like these particles in the wave that I feel like is mostly deterministic and takes universe from some kind of a big bang to some kind of a super intelligent replicator, some kind of a stable point in the universe given these laws of physics. You don't think, as Einstein said, God doesn't play dice. So you think it's mostly deterministic. There's no randomness in the thing. I think as a deterministic, there's tons of, well, I'm I'm going to be careful with randomness pseudo random. Yeah, I don't like random. I think maybe the laws of physics are deterministic. Yeah, I think they're deterministic. He's just got really uncomfortable with the question. Do you have anxiety about whether the universe is random or not? There's no randomness. You say you like goodwill hunting. It's not your fault, Andre. It's not your fault, man. So you don't like randomness. Yeah, I think it's unsettling. I think it's a deterministic system. I think that things that look random, like say the collapse of the wave function, etc. I think they're actually deterministic, just entanglement and so on. And some kind of a multi-verse theory, something, something. Okay, so why does it feel like we have a free will? Like if I raise this hand, I chose to do this now. What that doesn't feel like a deterministic thing. It feels like I'm making a choice. It feels like it. Okay, so it's all feelings. It's just feelings. Yeah. So when RLA agent does make any choice, is that it's not really make any choice. The choice is already there. Yeah, you're interpreting the choice and you're creating a narrative for having made it. Yeah, and now we're talking about the narrative. It's very meta. Looking back, what is the most beautiful or surprising idea in deep learning or AI in general, that you've come across. You've seen this field explode and grow in interesting ways. Just what cool idea is like we made you sit back and go. Small, bigger, small. Well, the one that I've been thinking about recently, the most probably is the the transformer architecture. So basically, neural networks have a lot of architectures that where trendy have come and gone for different sensor modalities like for vision, audio, text. You would process them with different looking neural nets. And recently, we've seen this convergence towards one architecture, the transformer. And you can feed it video or you can feed it, images or speech or text and it just gobbles it up. And it's kind of like a bit of a general purpose computer. There is also trainable and very efficient to run in our hardware. And so this paper came out in 2016, I want to say attention is all you need. Detention is all you need. You could have said the paper title in retrospect that it wasn't it didn't foresee the bigness of the impact that it was going to have. Yeah, I'm not sure if the authors were aware of the impact that that paper would go on to have probably they weren't. But I think they were aware of some of the motivations and design decisions behind the transformer and they chose not to, I think, expand on it in that way in the paper. And so I think they had an idea that there was more than just the surface of just like over just doing translation and here's a better architecture. You're not just doing translation. This is like a really cool, differentiable, optimizable, efficient computer that you've proposed. And maybe they didn't have all of that foresight, but I think it's really interesting. Isn't it funny? Sorry to interrupt that title is memeable that they went for such a profound idea they went with the I don't think anyone used that kind of title before, right? Attention is all you need. Yeah, it's like a meme or something. Yeah, it's not funny that one. Like maybe if it was a more serious title, we don't have the impact. Honestly, yeah, there's an element of me that honestly agrees with you and prefers it this way. Yes. If it was too grand, it would overpromise and then underdeveloper potentially. So you want to just meme your way to greatness. That should be a t-shirt. So you tweeted the transformers and magnificent neural network architecture because it is a general purpose, differentiable computer. It is simultaneously expressive in the forward pass, optimizable via back propagation gradient descent and efficient high parallelism compute graph. Can you discuss some of those details expressed of optimizable, efficient, yeah, for memory or in general, whatever comes to your heart? You want to have a general purpose computer that you can train on arbitrary problems. Like say the task of next work prediction or detecting if there's a cat in a image or something like that. And you want to train this computer so you want to set its weights. And I think there's a number of design criteria that sort of overlap in the transformer simultaneously that made it very successful. And I think the author is where kind of deliberately trying to make this really powerful architecture. And so in a, basically it's very powerful in the forward pass because it's able to express very general computation as sort of something that looks like message passing. You have nodes and the old store vectors. And these nodes get to basically look at each other and it's each other's vectors. And they get to communicate. And basically nodes get to broadcast, hey, I'm looking for certain things. And then other nodes get to broadcast, hey, these are the things I have. Those are the keys in the values. So it's not just attention. Yeah, exactly. Chessformer is much more than just the attention component that's got many pieces architectural that went into it. The residual connection of the weights arranged. There's a multi-layer perceptron and they're the weights stacked and so on. But basically there's a message passing scheme where nodes get to look at each other, decide what's interesting, and then update each other. And so I think the, when you get to the details of it, I think it's a very expressive function. So it can express lots of different types of algorithms in forward pass. Not only that, but the weights designed with the residual connections, lane normalizations, the softmatics, attention and everything. It's also optimizable. This is a really big deal because there's lots of computers. There are powerful that you can't optimize. Or they are not easy to optimize using the techniques that we have, which is backpropocation and gradient descent. These are our first order methods, very simple optimizers, really. And so you also needed to be optimizable. And then lastly, you wanted to run efficiently in our hardware. Our hardware is a massive throughput machine, like GPUs. They prefer lots of parallelism. So you don't want to do lots of sequential operations. You want to do a lot of operations seriously. And the transformer is designed with that in mind as well. And so it's designed for our hardware and is designed to both be very expressive in a forward pass, but also very optimizable in the backward pass. And you said that the residual connection support of kind of ability to learn short algorithms fast and first and then gradually extend them longer during training. Yeah. What's the idea of learning short algorithms? Right. Think of it as a, so basically a transformer is a series of blocks, right. And these blocks have attention and a little more to the upper section. And so you go off into a block and you come back to this residual pathway. And then you go off and you come back. And then you have a number of layers arranged sequentially. And so the way to look at it, I think, is because of the residual pathway in the backward pass, the gradients sort of flow allowing it uninterrupted because addition distributes the gradient equally to all of its branches. So the gradient from the supervision at the top just floats directly to the first layer. And the all the residual connections are arranged so that in the beginning and during initialization, they contribute nothing to the residual pathway. So what it kind of looks like is imagine the transformer is kind of like a Python function, like a death. And you get to do various kinds of like lines of code. So you have a hundred layers deep transformer. Typically they would be much shorter, say 20. So you have 20 lines of code and you can do something in them. And so think of during the optimization, basically what it looks like is first you optimize the first line of code and then the second line of code can kick in and the third line of code can kick in. And I kind of feel like because of the residual pathway and the dynamics of the optimization, you can sort of learn a very short algorithm that gets the approximate answer. But then the other layers can sort of kick in and start to create a contribution. And at the end of it, you're optimizing over an algorithm that is 20 lines of code. Except these lines of code are very complex because this is an entire block of a transformer. You can do a lot in there. Well, it's really interesting is that this transformer architecture actually has been a remarkably resilient. Basically, the transformer that came out in 2016 is the transformer you would use today, except you reshuffle some delayer norms. The delayer normalizations have been reshuffle to a pre-norm formulation. And so it's been remarkably stable, but there's a lot of bells and whistles that people have attached on it and try to improve it. I do think that basically it's a big step in simultaneously optimizing for lots of properties of a desirable neural network architecture. And I think people have been trying to change it, but it's proven remarkably resilient. But I do think that there should be even better architectures potentially. But it's you admire the resilience here. There's something profound about this architecture that at least reshuffle. So maybe we can everything can be turned into a problem that transformers can solve. Currently, definitely looks like the transformer is taking over AI and you can feed basically arbitrary problems into it. And it's a general, the Frenchable computer and it's extremely powerful. And this conversion in AI has been really interesting to watch for me personally. What else do you think could be discovered here about transformers? Like what's the surprising thing? Or is it a stable, I want a stable place. Is there something interesting where my discover about transformers? Like a Ha moment, maybe has to do with memory, maybe knowledge representation, that kind of stuff. Definitely the zeitgeist today is just pushing, like basically right now the zeitgeist is do not touch the transformer, touch everything else. So people are scaling up the data sets, making them much, much bigger. They're working on the evaluation, making the evaluation much, much bigger. And they're basically keeping the architecture unchanged. And that's how we've, that's the last five years of progress in AI kind of. What do you think about one flavor of it, which is language models? Have you been surprised? Has your sort of imagination been captivated by you mentioned GPD and all the big and big and bigger language models? And what are the limits of those models do you think? So just the task of natural language. Basically the way GPD is trained, right? As you just download a massive amount of text data from the internet and you try to predict the next word in a sequence, roughly speaking. You're predicting a little word chunks, but roughly speaking, that's it. And what's been really interesting to watch is basically it's a language model. Language models have actually existed for a very long time. There's papers on language modeling from 2003, even earlier. Can you explain in that case what language model is? Yeah, so language model just basically the rough idea is just predicting the next word in a sequence, roughly speaking. So there's a paper from, for example, Ben Geo and the team from 2003, where for the first time they were using a neural network to take say like three or five words and predict the next word. And they're doing this on much smaller datasets and the neural net is not a transformer. It's a multi-air perceptron, but it's the first time that a neural network has been applied in that setting. But even before neural networks, there were language models, except they were using N-gram models. So N-gram models are just a count-based models. So if you try to take two words and predict the third one, you just count up how many times you've seen any two word combinations and what came next. And what you predict as coming next is just what you've seen the most of in the training set. And so language modeling has been around for a long time. Neural networks have done language modeling for a long time. So really what's new or interesting or exciting is just realizing that when you scale it up with powerful enough neural net transformer, you have all these emerging properties where basically what happens is if you have a large enough dataset of text, you are in the task of predicting the next word, you are multitasking a huge amount of different kinds of problems. You are multitasking understanding of you know chemistry, physics, human nature. Lots of things are sort of clustered in that objective. It's a very simple objective, but actually you have to understand a lot about the world to make that prediction. You just said the you word understanding. Are you in terms of chemistry and physics and so on? What do you feel like is doing? Is it searching for the right context? What is the actual process happening here? Yeah, so basically it gets a thousand words and is trying to predict a thousand at first. And in order to do that very, very well over the entire dataset available on the internet, you actually have to basically kind of understand the context of what's going on in there. Yeah. And it's a sufficiently hard problem that you if you have a powerful enough computer like a transformer, you end up with interesting solutions. And you can ask it to do all kinds of things and it shows a lot of emerging properties like in context learning that was the big deal with GPT and the original paper when they published it is that you can just sort of prompt it in various ways and ask it to do various things and it will just kind of complete the sentence. But in a process of just completing the sentence, it's actually solving all kinds of really interesting problems that we care about. Do you think it's doing something like understanding? Like when we use the word understanding for us humans. I think it's doing some understanding. In its way, it understands I think a lot about the world and it has to in order to predict the next word in the sequence. So it's training on the data from the internet. What do you think about this approach in terms of the datasets of using data from the internet? Do you think the internet has enough structured data to teach AI about human civilization? Yeah, so I think the internet has a huge amount of data. I'm not sure if it's a complete and upset. I don't know that text is enough for having a sufficiently powerful AI as an outcome. Of course, there is audio and video and images and all that kind of stuff. Yeah, so text by itself, I'm a little bit suspicious about. There's a ton of things we don't put in text in writing just because they're obvious to us about how the world works and the physics of it and the things fall. We don't put that stuff in text because why would you? We shared that understanding. And so text is a communication medium between humans and it's not a all-encompassing medium of knowledge about the world. But as you pointed out, we do have video and we have images and we have audio. And so I think that definitely helps a lot. But we haven't trained models sufficiently across both across all those modalities yet. So I think that's what a lot of people are interested in. But I wonder what that shared understanding of what we might call common sense has to be learned inferred in order to complete the sentence correctly. So maybe the fact that it's implied on the internet, the model is going to have to learn that. Not by reading about it, by inferring it in the representation. So common sense, just like, I don't think we learn common sense. Like nobody says tells us explicitly, we just figure it all out by interacting with the world. Right. And so here's a model of reading about the way people interact with the world. It might have to infer that. I wonder. Yeah. You briefly worked on a project called the World of Bits training in our RL system to take actions on the internet versus just consuming the internet. Like you talked about, do you think there's a future for that kind of system interacting with the internet to help the learning? Yes, I think that's probably the final frontier for a lot of these models. Because as you mentioned, when I was at OpenAI, I was working on this project World of Bits and basically it was the idea of giving neural networks access to a keyboard and a mouse. And the idea is possibly go wrong. So basically, you perceive the input of the screen pixels and basically the state of the computer is sort of visualized for human consumption in images of the web browser and stuff like that. And then you give the neural or the ability to press keyboards and use the mouse. And we're trying to get it to, for example, complete bookings and interact with user interfaces. And would you learn from that experience? Like, what was some fun stuff? This is a super cool idea. Yeah. I mean, it's like, yeah, the step between observer to actor is a super fascinating step. Yeah. Well, it's the universal interface in the digital realm, I would say. And there's a universal interface in the physical realm, which in my mind is a humanoid form factor kind of thing. We can later talk about Optimus and so on. But I feel like there's a, they're kind of like similar philosophy in some way, where the world, the physical world is designed for the human form. And the digital world is designed for the human form of seeing the screen and using keyword, not keyboard and mouse. And so it's the universal, universal interface that can basically command the digital infrastructure we've built up for ourselves. And so it feels like a very powerful interface to command and to build on top of now to your question as to like what I learned from that. It's interesting because the world of bits was basically too early, I think, at open AI at the time. This is around 2015 or so. And the zeitgeist at that time was very different in AI from the zeitgeist today. At the time, everyone was super excited about reinforcement learning from scratch. This is the time of the Atari paper where neural networks were playing Atari games and beating humans in some cases, AlphaGo and so on. So everyone's very excited about training neural networks from scratch using reinforcement learning directly. It turns out that reinforcement learning is extremely inefficient way of training neural networks because you're taking all these actions and all these observations and you get some sparse rewards once in a while. So you do all this stuff based on all these inputs. And once in a while you're like told you did a good thing, you did a bad thing. And it's just an extremely hard problem when you can't learn from that. You can burn a forest and you can sort of brute force through it. And we saw that I think with you know, with Go and Dota and so on and does work. But it's extremely inefficient and not how you want to approach problems, practically speaking. And so that's the approach that at the time we also took to world of bits. We would have an agent initialize randomly. So with keyboard mash and mouse mash and try to make a booking. And it's just like revealed the insanity of that approach very quickly where you have to stumble by the correct booking in order to get a reward of you did it correctly. And you're never going to stumble by it by chance at random. So even with a simple web interface, there's too many options. There's just too many options. And it's two sparse of reward signal. And you're starting from scratch at the time. And so you don't know how to read. You don't understand pictures, images, buttons. You don't understand what it means to like make a booking. But now what's happened is it is time to revisit that and opening eyes interested in this companies like adept are interested in this and so on. And the idea is coming back because the interface is very powerful. But now you're not training an agent from scratch. You are taking the GPT as an initialization. So GPT is pre-trained on all of text. And it understands what's a booking. It understands what's a submit. It understands quite a bit more. And so it already has those representations. They are very powerful. And that makes all the training significantly more efficient and makes the problem tractable. Should the interaction be like the way humans see it, with the buttons and the language, or should be with HTML, JavaScript and CSS? What do you think is the better? So today all of this interaction is mostly on the level of HTML, CSS and so on. That's done because of computational constraints. But I think ultimately everything is designed for human visual consumption. And so at the end of the day, there's all the additional information is in the layout of the web page and what's next to it and what's our red background and all this kind of stuff and what it looks like visually. So I think that's the final frontier as we are taking in pixels and we're giving out keyboard mouse commands. But I think it's in practical still today. Do you worry about bots on the internet? Given these ideas, given how exciting they are, do you worry about bots on Twitter being not the stupid bots that we see now with the crypto bots? But the bots that might be out there actually that we don't see that they're interacting in interesting ways. So this kind of system feels like it should be able to pass the, I'm not a robot click button, whatever. Which do you actually understand how that test works? I don't quite like there's a check box or whatever that you click. It's presumably tracking mouse movement and the timing and so on. So exactly this kind of system we're talking about should be able to pass that. So yeah, what do you feel about bots that are language models plus have some interactability and are able to tweet and reply and so on. Do you worry about that world? Yeah, I think it's always been a bit of an arms race between sort of the attack and the defense. So the attack will get stronger but the defense will get stronger as well. Our ability to detect that. How do you defend? How do you detect? How do you know that your Carpati account on Twitter is as human? How would you approach that? Like if people were claim, you know, how would you defend yourself in the court of law that I'm a human? This account is yeah at some point I think it might be I think the society will evolve a little bit like we might start signing digitally signing some of our correspondence or you know things that we create. Right now it's not necessary but maybe in the future it might be. I do think that we are going towards a world where we share we share the digital space with AIs synthetic beings. Yeah and they will get much better and they will share our digital realm and they'll eventually share our physical realm as well. It's much harder but that's kind of like the world we're going towards and most of them will be benign and awful and some of them will be malicious and it's going to be an arms race trying to detect them. So I mean the worst isn't the AIs the worst is the AIs pretending to be human. So I don't know if it's always malicious. There's obviously a lot of malicious applications but yeah it could also be you know if I was an AI I would try very hard pretend to be human because we're in a human world. Yeah I wouldn't get any respect as an AI. Yeah I want to get some love and respect. I don't think the problem is intractable. People are are thinking about the proof of personhood and we might start digitally signing our stuff and we might all end up having like yeah basically some solution for proof of personhood it doesn't seem to me intractable. It's just something that we haven't had to do until now but I think once the need like really starts to emerge which is soon I think people will think about it much more. So but that too will be a race because obviously you can probably spoof or fake the proof of personhood. So you have to try to figure out how to probably I mean it's weird that we have like social security numbers and like passports and stuff. It seems like it's harder to fake stuff in the physical space but in the digital space it just feels like it's going to be very tricky. Very tricky to out because it seems to be pretty low cost to fake stuff. What are you going to put an AI in jail for like trying to use a fake personhood proof? I mean okay fine you'll put a lot of AI's in jail but there'll be more AI's I would try like exponentially more. The cost of creating a bot is very low. Unless there's some kind of way to track accurately like you're not allowed to create any program without showing tying yourself to that program. Like any program that runs on the internet you'll be able to trace every single human program that was involved with that yeah maybe you have to start declaring when you know we have to start drawing those boundaries and keeping track of okay what are digital entities versus human entities and what is the ownership of human entities and digital entities and something like that. I don't know but I think I'm optimistic that this is possible and in some sense we're currently in like the worst time of it because all these bots suddenly have become very capable but we don't have the fences yet built up the society and but I think that doesn't seem to me intractable it's just something that we have to deal with. It seems weird that the Twitter bot like really crappy Twitter bots are so numerous. I guess. So I presume that the engineers at Twitter are very good so it seems like what I would infer from that is it seems like a hard problem. They're probably catching all right if I were to sort of steal man the case it's a hard problem and there's a huge cost to false positive to removing a post by somebody that's not a bot. That's a crazy very bad user experience so they're very cautious about removing so maybe it's and maybe the bots are really good at learning what gets removed and not such that they can stay ahead of the removal process very quickly. My impression of it honestly is there's a lot of long for it. I mean yeah just that's what I it's not so allowed. It's my impression of it it's not so but you have yeah that's my impression as well but it feels like maybe you're seeing the the tip of the iceberg maybe the number of bots isn't like the trillions and you have to like just it's a constant assault of bots and yeah yeah I don't know I have to steal man the case because the bots I'm seeing are pretty like obvious I could write a few lines of code that catch these bots. I mean definitely there's a lot of long for it but I will say I agree that if you are a sophisticated actor you could probably create a pretty good bot right now you know using tools like GPT's because it's a language model you can generate faces that look quite good now and you can do this at scale and so I think yeah it's quite plausible and it's going to be hard to defend. There was a Google engineer that claimed that the lambda was sentient. Do you think there's any inkling of truth to what he felt and more importantly to me at least do you think language models will achieve sentience or the illusion of sentience soonish? Yes to me it's a little bit of a canary in a coal mine kind of moment honestly a little bit because so this engineer spoke to like a chatbot at Google and we can convince that there's a bot of sentient. Asked it's some existential philosophical question and it gave like reasonable answers and looked real and so on. So to me it's a he was he wasn't sufficiently trying to stress the system I think and exposing the truth of it as it is today but I think this will be increasingly harder over time so yeah I think more and more people will basically become yeah I think there will be more people like that over time as this gets better like form an emotional connection to an AI. Yeah perfectly plausible in my mind. I think these AI's are actually quite good at human connection human emotion. A ton of text on the internet is about humans and connection and love and so on so I think they have a very good understanding in some sense of how people speak to each other about this and they're very capable of creating a lot of that kind of text. There's a lot of like sci-fi from 50s and 60s that imagined AI's in a very different way. They are calculating coal Balkan-like machines that's not what we're getting today. We're getting pretty emotional AI's that actually are very competent and capable of generating you know possible sounding text with respect to all of these topics. Yeah I'm really hopeful about AI systems that are like companions that help you grow, develop as a human being, help you maximize long-term happiness but I'm also very worried about AI systems that figure out from the internet that humans get attracted to drama and so these would just be like shit talking AI's that just constantly did you hear it? They'll do gossip, they'll do they'll try to plant seeds of suspicion to other humans that you love and trust and just kind of mess with people. Because that's going to get a lot of attention. So drama, maximized drama on the path of maximizing engagement and us humans will feed into that machine and get it'll be a giant drama shit storm. So I'm worried about that so it's the objective function really defines the way that humans have positioned progresses with AI's in it. Yeah I think right now at least today they are not sort of it's not correct to really think of them as goal seeking agents that want to do something. They have no long-term memory or anything. It's literally a good approximation of it is you get a thousand words and you're trying to pretty good a thousand at first and then you continue feeding it in and you are free to prompt it in whatever way you want. So in text so you say okay you are a psychologist and you are very good and you love humans and here's a conversation between you and another human, human calling something, you something and then it just continues the pattern and suddenly you're having a conversation with a fake psychologist who's trying to help you. And so it's still kind of like an enrollment rate tool. It is a um people can prompt it in arbitrary ways and it can create really incredible text but it doesn't have long-term goals over long periods of time it doesn't try to uh so it doesn't look that way right now. Yeah but you can do short-term goals that have long-term effects. So if my prompting short-term goal is to get Andra Kapatich respond to me on Twitter whenever like I think I might that's the goal but it might figure out that talking shit to you it'll be the best in a highly sophisticated interesting way and then you build up a relationship when you respond once and then it like over time it gets to not be sophisticated and just like just talk shit and okay maybe you won't get to Andra but it might get to another celebrity and might get into other big accounts and then it'll just so with just that simple goal get them to respond. Yeah maximize the probability of a real response. Yeah I mean you could prompt a powerful model like this with their it's opinion about how to do any possible thing you're interested in. So they will check us they're kind of on track to become these oracles I could sort of think of it that way. They are oracles uh currently is just text but they will have calculators they will have access to Google search they will have all kinds of gadgets and gizmos they will be able to operate the internet and find different information and um yeah in some sense that's kind of like currently what it looks like in terms of the development. Do you think it'll be an improvement eventually over what Google is for access to human knowledge like it'll be a more effective search engine to access human knowledge. I think there's definitely scope in building a better search engine today and I think Google they have all the tools all the people they have everything they need they have all the puzzle pieces they have people training transformers at scale they have all the data uh it's just not obvious if they are capable as an organization to innovate on their search engine and if they don't someone else will there's absolute scope for building a significantly better search engine built on these tools. It's so interesting a large company where the search there's already an infrastructure it works as it brings out a lot of money so where structure inside a company is their motivation to pivot. Yeah to say we're going to build a new search engine. Yeah that's hard. So it's usually going to come from a startup right. That's um that would be yeah or some other more competent organization. So uh I don't know so currently for example maybe Bing has another shot at it you know as an example Microsoft Edge as we're talking offline. Um I mean I definitely it's really interesting because search engines used to be about okay here's some query here's here's here's web pages that look like the stuff that you have but you could just directly go to answer and then have supporting evidence um and these uh these models basically they've read all the texts and they've read all the web pages and so sometimes when you see or self going over to search results and sort of getting like a sense of like the average answer to whatever you're interested in uh like that just directly comes out you don't have to do that work. Um so they're kind of like uh yeah I think they have a way to this of distilling all that knowledge into like some level of insight basically. Do you think of prompting as a kind of teaching and learning like this whole process like another layer? You know because maybe that's what humans are we already have that background model and then the world is prompting you. Yeah exactly. I think the way we are programming these computers now like GPDs is is converging to how you program humans. I mean how do I program humans via prompt? I go to people and I I prompt them to do things I prompt them for information and so uh natural language prompt is how we program humans and we're starting to program computers directly in that interface. It's like pretty remarkable honestly. So you've spoken a lot about the idea of software 2.0. Um all good ideas become like clichs so quickly like the terms it's kind of hilarious. Um it's like I think M&M once said that like if he gets annoyed by a song he's written very quickly that means it's going to be a big hit because it's too catchy. But uh can you describe this idea and how you're thinking about it has evolved over the months in years since since you coined it? Yeah. Yes I had a blog post on software 2.0 I think several years ago now um and the reason I wrote that post is because I kept I kind of saw something remarkable happening in like software development and how a lot of code was being transitioned to be written not in sort of like C++ and so on but it's written in the weights of a neural net. Basically just saying that neural nets are taken over software. They're almost software and uh taking more and more and more tasks and at the time I think not many people understood uh this uh deeply enough that this is a big deal this is a big transition. Neural networks were seen as one of multiple classification algorithms you might use for your dataset problem on Kaggle. Like this is not that this is a change in how we program computers and I saw neural nets as uh this is going to take over the way we program computers is going to change it's not going to be people writing a software in C++ or something like that and directly programming the software it's going to be accumulating uh training sets and data sets and crafting these objectives by which you train these neural nets and at some point there's going to be a compilation process from the datasets and the objective and the architecture specification into the binary which is really just uh the neural net uh you know weights and the forward pass of the neural net and then you can deploy that binary and so I was talking about that sort of transition and uh that's what the post is about and I saw this sort of play out in a lot of uh fields uh you know auto-parapal being one of them but also just uh simple image classification people thought originally you know in the 80s and so on that they would write the algorithm for detecting a dog in an image and they had all these ideas about how the brain does it and first we detect corners and then we detect lines and then we stitched them up and they were like really going at it they were like thinking about how they're going to write the algorithm and this is not the way you build it um and there was a smooth transition where okay uh first we thought we were going to build everything then we were building the features uh so like hog features and things like that uh that detect these little statistical patterns from image patches and then there was a little bit of uh learning on top of it like a support vector machine or binary classifier uh for cat versus dog and images on top of the features so we wrote the features but we trained the last layer sort of the the classifier and then people are like actually let's not even design the features because we can't honestly we're not very good at it so let's also learn the features and then you end up with basically a convolutional neural net where you're learning most of it you're just specifying the architecture and the architecture has tons of the fill-in blanks which is all the knobs and you let the optimization write most of it and so this transition is happening across the industry everywhere and uh suddenly we end up with a ton of code that is written in neural net weights and I was just pointing out that the analogy is actually pretty strong and we have a lot of developer environments for software 1.0 like we have uh i.d.e.s um how you work with code how you debug code how do you how do you run code uh how do you maintain code we have github so I was trying to make those analogies in the new realm like what is the github i'll software 2.0 turns out it's something that looks like hugging face right now uh you know and so I think some people took it seriously and built cool companies and uh many people originally attacked the post it actually was not built received when I wrote it and I think maybe it has something to do with the title but the post was not well received and I think more people sort of have been coming around to it over time yeah so you were the director of AI at Tesla where I think this idea was really implemented at scale which is how you have engineering teams doing software 2.0 so can you sort of linger on that idea of I think we're in the really early stages of everything you just said which is like github i.d.e.s like how do we build engineering teams that that work in software 2.0 systems and the data collection and the data annotation which is all part of that software 2.0 like what do you think is the task of programming software 2.0 is it debugging in the space of hyperparameters or is it also debugging in the space of data yeah the way by which you program the computer and influence its algorithm is not by writing the commands yourself you're changing mostly the data set uh you're changing the um lost functions of like what the neural net is trying to do how he's trying to predict things but basically the data sets and the architecture so the neural net and um um so in the case of the autopilot a lot of the data sets had to do with for example detection of objects and lane line markings and traffic lights and so on so you accumulate massive data sets of here's an example here's the desired label and then uh here's roughly how the architect here's roughly what the algorithm should look like and that's a completion neural net so the specification of the architecture is like a hint as to what the algorithm should roughly look like and then the fill in the blanks uh process of optimization is uh is the training process and then you take your neural net that was trained it gives all the right answers on your data set and you deploy it so there's in that case perhaps at all machine learning cases there's a lot of tasks so is coming up formulating a task like uh for a multi-headed neural network is formulating a task part of the programming yeah hurry Marcel how you break down a problem yeah into a set of tasks yeah I'm on a high level I would say if you look at the software running in in the autopilot I give a number of talks on this topic I would say originally a lot of it was written in software 1.0 there's there's imagined lots of C++ all right and then uh gradually there was a tiny neural net that was for example predicting given a single image is there like a traffic light or not or is there a lane line marking or not and this neural net didn't have uh too much to do in this in the scope of the software it was making tiny predictions on individual image and then the rest of the system stitched it up so okay we're actually we don't have just a single camera with eight cameras we actually have eight cameras over time and so what do you do with these predictions how do you put them together how do you do the fusion of all that information and how do you act on it all of that was written by humans um in C++ and then we decided okay we don't actually want uh to do all of that fusion in C++ code because we're actually not good enough to write that algorithm we want the neural net to write the algorithm and we want to port all that software into the 2.0 stack and so then we actually had neural net that now take all the eight camera images simultaneously and make predictions for all of that so um and and and actually they don't make predictions in a in the space of images they now make predictions directly in 3d and actually they don't uh in 3d dimensions around the car and now actually we don't um manually fuse the predictions over in 3d over time we don't trust ourselves to write that tracker so actually we give the neural net the information over time so it takes these videos now and makes those predictions and so you're starting just like putting more and more power into the neural net more and more processing and at the end of it the eventual sort of goal is to have most of the software potentially be in the 2.0 land um because it works significantly better humans are just not very good at writing software basically so the prediction is happening in this like 4d land yeah with 3d dimensional world over time yeah how do you do annotation in that world what what what have you as just a data annotation whether it's self-supervised or manual by humans is um is a big part of the software 2.0 world right i would say by far in the industry if you're like talking about the industry and how what is the technology of what we have available everything is supervised learning so you need a data sets of input desired output and you need lots of it and um there are three properties of it that you need you need it to be very large you need it to be accurate no mistakes and you need it to be diverse you don't want to uh just have a lot of correct examples of one thing you need to really cover the space of possibility as much as you can and the more you can cover the space of possible inputs the better the algorithm will work at the end now once you have really good data sets that you're collecting curating um and cleaning you can train uh your neural net um on top of that so a lot of the work goes into cleaning those data sets now as you pointed out it's probably it could be the question is how do you achieve a ton of uh if you want to basically predict in 3d you need data in 3d to back that up so in this video we have eight videos coming from all the cameras of the system and uh this is what they saw and this is the truth of what actually was around there was this car there was this car this car these are the lane line markings this is geometry of the road there is traffic light in this redimensional position you need the ground truth um and so the big question that the team was solving of course is how do you how do you arrive at that ground truth because once you have a million of it and it's large clean and diverse then training your own net on it works extremely well and you can ship that into the car and uh so there's many mechanisms by which we collected that uh trained data uh you can always go for a human annotation you can go for simulation as a source of grunt truth you can also go for what we call the offline tracker um that we spoken about at the AI day and so on which is basically an automatic reconstruction process for taking those videos and uh recovering the three-dimensional sort of reality of what was around that car so basically think of doing like a three-dimensional reconstruction as an offline thing and then uh understanding that okay there's 10 seconds of video this is what we saw and therefore here's all the lane line scars and so on and then once you have that annotation you can train your own nets to imitate it and how difficult is the reconstruction the three reconstruction it's difficult but it can be done so there's so there's overlap between the cameras and you do the reconstruction and there's uh perhaps if there's any inaccuracy so that's caught in the annotation step uh yes the nice thing about the annotation is that it is fully offline you have infinite time you have a chunk of one minute and you're trying to just offline in a super computer somewhere figure out where were the positions of all the cars all the people and you have your full one minute video from all the angles and you can run all the neural nets you want and they can be very efficient massive neural nets there can be neural nets that can't even run in the car later at test time so they can be even more powerful neural nets than what you can eventually deploy so you can do anything you want three-dimensional reconstruction neural nets uh anything you want just to recover that truth and then you supervise that truth what have you learned you said no mistakes about humans doing annotation because i assume humans are uh there's like a range of things they're good at in terms of clicking stuff on screen isn't that how interesting is that you have a problem with designing an annotator or humans are accurate and joy at like what are they even the metrics are efficient or productive all that kind of stuff yeah so uh i grew the annotation team at Tesla from basically zero to a thousand uh while i was there that was really interesting you know my background is a PhD student researcher so growing that kind of organization was pretty crazy uh but uh yeah i think it's extremely interesting and part of the design process very much behind the autopilot as to where you use humans humans are very good at certain kinds of annotations they're very good for example at two-dimensional annotations of images they're not good at annotating uh cars over time in three-dimensional space very very hard and so that's why we were very careful to design the tasks that are easy to do for humans versus things that should be left to the offline tracker like maybe the maybe the computer will do older triangulation and three-degree construction but the human will say exactly these pixels of the image are car exactly these pixels are human and so co-designing the the data annotation pipeline was uh very much bread and butter was what i was doing daily do you think there's still a lot of open problems in that space um just in general annotation where the stuff the machines are good at machines do and the humans do what they're good at and there's maybe some iterative process right i think to a very large extent we went through a number of iterations and we learned a ton about how to create these data sets um i'm not seeing big open problems like originally when i joined i was like i was really not sure how this would turn out yeah but by the time i left i was much more secure and actually we sort of understand the philosophy of how to create these data sets and i was pretty comfortable with where that was at the time so what are strengths and limitations of cameras for the driving task in your understanding when you formulate the driving task as a vision task with eight cameras you've seen that the entire you know most of the history the computer vision field when it has to do with new on that works what just if you step back what are the strengths and limitations of pixels of using pixels to drive yeah pixels i think are a beautiful sensory beautiful sensor i would say the things like cameras are very very cheap and they provided ton of information ton of bits also it's uh extremely cheap sensor for a ton of bits and each one of these bits as a constraint on the state of the world and so you get lots of megapixel images very cheap and it just gives you all these constraints for understanding what's actually out there in the world so vision is probably the highest bandwidth sensor it's a very high bandwidth sensor and i love that pixels is a is a is a constraint on the world is this highly complex high bandwidth constraint on the world on the state of the world that's fascinating it's not just but again this real real importance of it's the sensor that humans use therefore everything is designed for that sensor yeah the text the writing the flashing signs everything is designed for vision and so and you just find it everywhere and so that's why that is the interface you want to be in um talking again about these universal interfaces and uh that's where we actually want to measure the world as well and then uh develop software um for that sensor but there's other constraints on the state of the world that humans use to understand the world i mean vision ultimately is the main one but we were like we're like referencing our understanding of human behavior and some common sense physics that could be inferred from vision from from a perception perspective but it feels like we're using some kind of reasoning to uh predict the world yeah not just the pixels i mean you have a powerful prior uh so right for how the world evolves over time etc so it's not just about the likelihood term coming up from the data itself telling you about what you are observing but also the prior term of like where where are the likely things to see and how do they likely move and so on and the question is how complex is the uh the the range of possibilities that might happen in the driving task right that's still is that to you still an open problem of how difficult is driving like philosophically speaking um like do you do all the time you work on driving do you understand how hard driving is yeah driving is really hard because it has to do with the predictions of all these other agents and the theory of mind and you know what they're going to do and are they looking at you are they where are they looking where are they thinking yeah there's a lot that goes there at the at the full tail off you know the the expansion of the noise that we have to become familiar with it eventually the final problems are of that form i don't think those are the problems that are very common uh i think eventually they're important but it's like really in the tail end in the tail end the rare edge cases uh from the vision perspective what are the toughest parts of the vision problem of driving um well basically the sensor is extremely powerful but you still need to process that information um and so going from brightnesses of these special values to hey here the three-dimensional world is extremely hard and that's what the neural networks are fundamentally doing and so um the difficulty really is in just doing an extremely good job of engineering the entire pipeline uh the entire data engine having the capacity to train these neural nuts having the ability to evaluate the system and iterate on it uh so i would say just doing this in production at scale is like the hard part it's an execution problem so the data engine but also the um the sort of deployment of the system such that has low latency performance so it has to do all these steps yeah for the neural nuts specifically just making sure everything fits into the chip on the car yeah and uh you have a finite budget of flops that you can perform and uh and memory bend with another constraints and you have to make sure it flies and you can squeeze in as much compute as you can into the tiny what have you learned from that process because it may be that's one of the bigger like new things coming from a research background where there's there's a system that has to run under heavily constrained resources right has to run really fast what what kind of insights have you uh learned from that yeah i'm not sure if it's if there's too many insights you're trying to create a neural net that will fit in what you have available and you're always trying to optimize it and we talked a lot about it on the AI day and uh basically the the triple backflips that the team is doing to make sure it all fits and utilizes the engine uh so i think it's extremely good engineering um and then there's all all kinds of little insights peppered in on how to do it properly let's actually zoom out because i don't think we talked about the data engine the entirety of the layout of this idea that i think is just beautiful with humans in the loop can you describe the data engine yeah the data engine is what i call the almost biological feeling like process by which yeah you uh perfect the training sets for these neural networks um so because most of the programming now is in the level of these datasets and make sure they're large diverse and clean oh basically you have a data set that you think is good you train your neural net you deploy it and then you observe how well it's performing and you're trying to uh always increase the quality of your data set so you're trying to catch scenarios basically there are basically rare and uh it is in these scenarios that your own national typically struggling because they weren't told what to do in those rare cases in the data set but now you can close the loop because if you can now collect all those at scale you can then feed them back into the reconstruction process i described and reconstruct the truth in those cases and add it to the data set and so the whole thing ends up being like a staircase of improvement of uh perfecting your training set and you have to go through deployments so that you can mine uh the parts that are not yet represented well on the data set so your data set is basically imperfect it needs to be diverse it has pockets there are missing and you need to pat out the pockets you can sort of think of it that way in the data what role do humans play in this so what's the uh this biological system like uh a human body is made up of cells what role like how do you optimize the human uh system the the multiple engineers collaborating figuring out what to focus on what to contribute which which tasks to optimize in this neural network uh who is in charge of figuring out which task needs more data what can you can you speak to the hyperparameters the human uh system it really just comes down to extremely good execution from an engineering team and those of what they're doing they understand intuitively the philosophical insights underlying the data engine and the process by which the system improves and uh how to again like delegate the strategy of the data collection and how that works and then just making sure it's all extremely well executed and that's where most of the work is is not even the philosophizing or the research or the idea so that it's just extremely good execution is so hard when you're dealing with data at that scale so your role in the data engine executing well on it is difficult and extremely important is there a priority of like uh like a vision board of saying like we really need to get better at stoplights yeah like the prioritization of tasks is that essentially and that comes from the data that comes to um the virologic sense to what we are trying to achieve in a product or map or we're trying to the release we're trying to get out in the feedback from the q18 worth it where the system is struggling or not the things we're trying to improve and the q18 gives some signal some information in aggregate about the performance of the system in various conditions and then of course all of us drive it and we can also see it it's really nice to work with a system that you can also experience yourself and you know it drives you home it's is there some insight you can draw from your individual experience that you just can't quite get from an aggregate statistical analysis of the data yeah it's so weird right yes it's it's not scientific in a sense because you're just one anecdotal sample yeah I think there's a ton of it's it's a source of truth it's your interaction with the system yeah and you can see it you can play with it you can perturb it you can get a sense of it you have an intuition for it I think numbers just like have a way of numbers and plots and graphs are you know much harder uh it hides a lot of it's like if you train a language model it's a really powerful way is by you interacting with it yeah hundred percent try to build up an intuition yeah I think like Elon also like he always wanted to drive this the system himself he drives a lot and I don't say almost daily so uh he also sees this as a source of truth you driving the system um and it performing and yeah so what do you think tough questions here uh so Tesla last year removed radar from um from the sensor suite and now just announced there's gonna remove all ultrasonic sensors relying solely on vision so camera only does that make the perception probably harder or easier I would almost reframe the question in some way so the thing is basically you would think that additional sensors by the way can it just interrupt good I wonder if the language model will ever do that if you prompt it let me reframe your question that would be epic this is the wrong prompt sorry it's like a little bit of a wrong question because basically you would think that these sensors are an asset to you yeah but if you fully consider the entire product and its entirety these sensors are actually potentially liability uh because these sensors aren't free they don't just appear on your car you need suddenly you need to have an entire supply chain you have people procuring it there can be problems with them they may need replacement they are part of the manufacturing process they can hold back the line in production uh you need to source them you need to maintain them you have to have teams that ride the firmware all of the all of it and then uh you also have to incorporate them fuse them into the system in some way and so it actually like blotes the organ the a lot of it and I think Elon is really good at simplify simplify best part is no part and he always tries to throw away things that are not essential because he understands the entropy in organizations and in the approach and I think uh in this case the cost is high and you're not potentially seeing it if you're just a computer vision engineer and I'm just trying to improve my network and you know is it more useful or less useful how how useful is it and the thing is if once you consider the full cost of a sensor it actually is potentially a liability and you need to be really sure that it's giving you extremely useful information in this case we looked at using it or not using it and the delta was not massive and so it's not useful is it also blow in the data engine like having more sensors at the end is a distraction and these sensors you know they can change over time for example you can have one type of say radar you can have other type of radar they change over time and I suddenly need to worry about it and I'm suddenly you have a column in your SQLite telling you oh what sensor type was it and they all have different distributions and then they can they just they contribute noise and entropy into everything and they bloat stuff and also organizationally has been really fascinating to me that it can be very distracting if you if all if you only want to get to work as vision all the resources are on it and you're building out a data engine and you're actually making forward progress because that is the the sensor with the most bandwidth the most constraints on the world and you're investing fully into that and you can make that extremely good if you're you're only a finite amount of sort of spend of focus across different facets of the system and this kind of reminds me of reach certain it's a bit of less than it just seems like simplifying the system in the long run of course you know know what the long way it seems to be always the right solution yeah yes in that case it was for RL but it seems to apply generally across all systems that do computation yeah so where what do you think about the LiDAR as a crutch debate the battle between point clouds and pixels yeah I think this debate is always like slightly confusing to me because it seems like the actual debate should be about like do you have the fleet or not that's like the really important thing about whether you can achieve a really good functioning of an AI system at the scale so data collection systems yeah do you have a fleet or not is significantly more important whether you have LiDAR or not it's just another sensor and yeah I think similar to the radar discussion basically I yeah I don't think it it basically doesn't offer extra extra information it's extremely costly it has all kinds of problems you have to worry about it you have to calibrate it etc it creates bloat and entropy you have to be really sure that you need this sensor in this case I basically don't think you need it and I think honestly I will make a stronger statement I think the others some of the other companies who are using it are probably going to drop it yeah so you have to consider the sensor in the full in considering can you build a big fleet that collects a lot of data and can you integrate that sensor with that data and that sensor into a data engine that's able to quickly find different parts of the data that continuously improves whatever the model that you're using yeah another way to look at it is like vision is necessary in a sense that the world is designed for human visual consumption so you need vision it's necessary and then also it is sufficient because it has all the information that you that you need for driving and humans obviously is vision to drive so it's both necessary and sufficient so you want to focus resources and you have to be really sure if you're going to bring in other sensors you could you could you could add sensors to infinity at some point you need to draw the line and I think in this case you have to really consider the full cost of anyone's sensor that you're adopting and do you really need it and I think the answer in this case you know so what do you think about the idea that the other companies are forming high resolution maps and constraining heavily the geographic regions in which they operate is that approach not in your in your view not going to scale over time to the entirety of the United States I think I'll take too long as you mentioned like they pre-map all the environments and they need to refresh the map and they have a perfect centimeter level accuracy map of everywhere they're going to drive it's crazy how are you going to when we're talking about autonomy actually changing the world we're talking about the deployment on the on the global scale autonomous systems for transportation and if you need to maintain a centimeter accurate map for earth or like for many cities and keep them updated it's a huge dependency that you're taking on huge dependency it's a massive massive dependency and now you need to ask yourself do you really need it and humans don't need it right so it's it's very useful to have a low level map of like okay the connectivity of your road you know that there's a fork coming up when you drive an environment you sort of have that high level understanding it's like a small google map and Tesla uses Google map like similar resolution information in its system but it will not pre-map environments to send me a centimeter level accuracy it's a crotch it's a distraction it costs entropy and it defuses the team it dilutes the team and you're not focusing on what's actually necessary which is the computer version problem what did you learn about machine learning about engineering about life about yourself as one human being from working with Elon Musk I think the most I've learned is about how to sort of run organizations efficiently and how to create efficient organizations and how to fight entropy in an organization so human engineering in the fight against entropy yeah there's a there's a I think Elon is a very efficient warrior in the fight against entropy in organizations what does the entropy in an organization look like exactly it's its process it's it's process and in it in efficiencies in the human beings and that kind of stuff yeah meetings he hates meetings he keeps telling people to skip meetings if they're not useful he basically runs the world's biggest startups I would say Tesla SpaceX are the world's biggest startups Tesla actually is multiple startups I think it's better to look at it that way and so I think he's he's extremely good at at that and yeah he's a very good intuition for streamline processes making everything efficient best part is no part simplifying focusing and just kind of removing barriers moving very quickly making big moves yeah all this is a very startup-y sort of seeming things but at scale so strong drive to simplify yeah from your perspective I mean that that also probably applies to just designing systems and machine learning and otherwise yeah like simplify simplifies yes what do you think is the secret to maintaining the startup culture in a company that grows is there can you introspect that I do think he needs someone in a powerful position with a big hammer like Elon who's like the cheerleader for that idea and ruthlessly pursues it if no one has a big enough hammer everything turns into committees democracy within the company process talking to stakeholders decision-making just everything just crumbles yeah if you have a big person who is also really smart and has a big hammer things move quickly so you said your favorite scene in interstellar is the intense docking scene with the AI and Cooper talking saying Cooper what are you doing docking it's not possible no it's necessary that's your good line by the way just so many questions there why an AI in that scene presumably is supposed to be able to compute a lot more than the human is saying it's not optimal why the human I mean that's a movie but shouldn't the AI know which better than the human anyway what do you think is the value of setting seemingly impossible goals so like are initial intuition which seems like something that you have taken on that Elon espouses that where the initial intuition of the community might say this is very difficult and then you take it on anyway with a crazy deadline you just from a human engineering perspective have you seen the value of that I wouldn't say that setting impossible goals exactly is is a good idea but I think setting very ambitious goals is a good idea I think there's a what I call sublinear scaling of difficulty which means that 10x problems are not 10x hard usually 10x 10x harder problem is like two or three x harder to execute on because if you want to actually like if you want to improve the system by 10% it costs some amount of work and if you want to 10x improve the system it doesn't cost you know 100x amount of work and it's because you fundamentally changed the approach and if you start with that constraint then some approaches are obviously dumb and not going to work and it forces you to reevaluate and I think it's a very interesting way of approaching problem solving but it requires us we're kind of thinking just going back to you like PhD days it's like how do you think which ideas in the machine learning community are solvable yes it's it requires what what is that I mean there's the cliche of first principles thinking but like it requires to basically ignore what the community is saying because it doesn't the community doesn't a community in science usually draw lines of what isn't is impossible right and like it's very hard to break out of that without going crazy yeah I mean I think a good example here is you know the deep learning revolution in some sense because you could be in computer vision at that time when during the deep learning sort of revolution of 2012 and so on you could be improving a computer vision stack by 10% or we can just be saying actually all this is useless and how do I do 10x better computer vision well it's not probably by tuning a hog feature detector I need a different approach I need something that is scalable going back to Richard Sutton's and understanding sort of like the philosophy of the bitter lesson and then being like actually I need much more scalable system like in your own network that in principle works and then having some deep believers that can actually execute on that mission and make it work so that's the 10x solution what do you think is the timeline to solve the problem of autonomous driving this still in part open question yeah I think the tough thing with timelines of self-driving obviously is that no one has created self-driving yeah so it's not like what do you think is a timeline to build this bridge well we've built million bridges before years how long that takes it's you know it's a no one has built autonomy it's not obvious some parts turn out to be much easier than others it's really hard to forecast you do your best based on trend lines and so on and based on intuition but that's why fundamental is just really hard to forecast this no one has to even still like being inside of it it's hard to to yes some things turn out to be much harder and some things turn out to be much easier do you try to avoid making forecasts because like Elon doesn't avoid them right and heads of car companies in the past have not avoided it either Ford and other places have made predictions that we're going to solve a level four driving by 2020 2021 whatever and now they all kind of backtrack in that prediction I you as a as an AI person do you for yourself privately make predictions or do they get in the way of like your actual ability to think about a thing yeah I would say like what's easy to say is that this problem is tractable and that's an easy prediction to make it's tractable it's going to work yes it's just really hard something's turned out to be harder than something's turned out to be easier so but it's it definitely feels tractable and it feels like at least the team at Tesla which is what I saw internally is definitely on track to that how do you form a strong representation that allows you to make a prediction about tractability so like you're the leader of a lot a lot of humans you have to kind of say this is actually possible like how do you build up that intuition it doesn't have to be even driving it could be other tasks it could be I want to what difficult tasks did you work on your life I mean classification at achieving certain just an image net certain level of superhuman level performance yeah expert intuition it's just intuition it's belief so just like thinking about it long enough like studying looking at simple data like you said driving my intuition is really flawed on this but like I don't have a good intuition about tractability it could be either it could be anything it could be solvable like you know the driving task could could be simplified into something quite trivial like the solutions of the problem would be quite trivial and at scale more and more cars driving perfectly might make the problem much easier yes and the more cars you have driving like people learn how to drive correctly not correctly but in a way that's more optimal for heterogeneous system of autonomous and semi autonomous and manually driven cars that could change stuff then again also I've spent a ridiculous number of hours just staring at pedestrians crossing streets thinking about humans and it feels like the way we use our eye contact it sends really strong signals and there's certain quirks and edge cases of behavior and of course a lot of the fatalities that happen have to do with drunk driving and both on the pedestrian side and the driver side so there's that problem of driving at night and all that kind of yeah so I wonder you know it's like the space of possible solution autonomous driving includes so many human factor issues that it's almost impossible to predict it could be super clean nice solutions yeah I would say definitely like to use a game analogy there's some fog of war but you definitely also see the frontier of improvement and you can measure historically how much you've made progress and I think for example at least what I've seen in roughly five years at Tesla when I joined it barely kept lane on the highway I think going up from Pellolta to SF was like three or four interventions anytime the road would do anything geometrically or turn too much it would just like not work and so going from that to like a pretty competent system in five years and seeing what happens also under the hood and what the scale of which the team is operating now with respect to data and compute to everything else is just a massive progress so this you're climbing amount and yes fog but you make a lot of progress you're making progress and you see what the next directions are and you're looking at some of the remaining challenges and they're not like they're not perturbing you and they're not changing your philosophy and you're not contributing to contorting yourself you're like actually these are the things I've always told you to do yeah the fundamental components of solving the problem seems to be there from data engine to the compute to the the compute on the car to the compute for the training all that kind of stuff so you've done over the years you've been a test you've done a lot of amazing break through ideas and engineering all of it from the data engine to the human side all of it can you speak to why you chose to leave Tesla basically as I described that Ren I think over time during those five years I've kind of gotten myself into a little bit of a managerial position most of my days were you know meetings and growing the organization and making decisions about a sort of high level strategic decisions about the team and what it should be working on and so on and it's kind of like a corporate executive role and I can do it I think I'm okay at it but it's not like fundamentally what I what I enjoy and so I think when I joined there was no computer vision team because Tesla was just going from the transition of using mobile eye a third party vendor for all of its computer vision to having to build its computer vision system so when I showed out there were two people training deep neural networks and they were training them at a computer at their at their legs like yeah there's a kind of basic classification task yeah and so I kind of like grew that into what I think is a fairly respectable deep learning team massive compute cluster a very good data annotation organization and I was very happy with where that was it became quite autonomous and so I kind of stepped away and I you know I'm very excited to do much more technical things again yeah and kind of like we focus on a GI what was this sole searching like because you took a little time off and think like what how many mushrooms did you take numbs I mean what what was going to your mind the human lifetime is finite yeah he did a few incredible things you're you're one of the best teachers of AI in the world you're one of the best and I don't mean that I mean then the best possible way you're one of the best tinkerers in the AI world meaning like understanding the fundamental fundamentals of how something works by building it from scratch and playing with the basic intuitions it's like Einstein Feynman we're all really good at this kind of stuff like yeah small example of a thing to to play with it to try to understand it so that and obviously now with with us you help build a team of machine learning like engineers and assistant that actually accomplishes something in the real world so given all that like what was the sole searching like what was hard because obviously I love the company a lot and I love I love Elon I love Tesla I want it so it's hard to leave I love the team basically but yeah I think I actually I will be potentially like interested in revisiting it maybe coming back at some point working optimists working in a GI at Tesla I think Tesla is going to do incredible things it's basically like it's a massive large scale robotics kind of company for the ton of in house talent for doing really incredible things and I think human robots are going to be amazing I think autonomous transportation is going to be amazing all this happening at Tesla so I think it's just a really amazing organization so being part of it and helping it along I think was very basically I enjoyed that a lot yeah it was basically difficult for those reasons because I love the company but you know I'm happy to potentially at something coming back for act 2 but I felt like at this stage I built the team it felt autonomous and I became a manager and I wanted to do a lot more technical stuff I wanted to learn stuff I want to teach stuff and I just kind of felt like it was a good time for a change of pace a little bit what do you think is the best movie sequel of all time speaking apart too it's like because most of them suck movies sequels yeah and you tweet about movies so just in a tiny tangent is there was your what was like a favorite movies equal got farther part two um are you a fan of got farther because you didn't even tweet or mention the godfather yeah I don't love that movie I know it hasn't added that out we're gonna edit out the hate towards the godfather how dare you I think I will make a strong statement I don't know why I don't know why but I basically don't like any movie before 1995 something like that didn't you mention Terminator 2 okay okay that's like a Terminator 2 was a little bit later 1990 no I think Terminator 2 was in the and I like Terminator 1 as well so okay so like a few exceptions but by and large for some reason I don't like movies before 1995 or something they feel very slow the camera is like zoomed out it's boring it's kind of naive it's kind of weird and also Terminator was very much ahead of its time yes and the godfather there's like no aji so I mean but you have good will hunting was one of the movies you mentioned and that doesn't have any aji either I guess that's mathematics yeah I guess occasionally I do enjoy movies that don't feature or like anchor man that has no that's that's the anchor man is so good I don't understand I'm speaking of aji because I don't understand why warfare was so funny it doesn't make sense it doesn't compute there's just something about him and he's a singular human because you don't get that many comedies these days and I wonder if I have to do about the culture or the like the the machine of Hollywood or does have to do with just we got lucky with certain people in comedy it came together because he is a singular human that that was a ridiculous tangent I apologize but you mentioned human robots so what do you think about Optimus about Tesla bought do you think we'll have robots in the factory and in the home in 10 20 30 40 50 years yeah I think it's very hard project I think it's going to take a while but who else is going to build human robots at scale yeah and I think it is a very good form factor to go after because like I mentioned the here the world is designed for human and form factor these things would be able to operate our machines they would be able to sit down in chairs a dry potentially even drive cars basically the world is designed for humans that's the form factor you want to invest into and make work over time I think you know there's another school of thought which is okay pick a problem and design a robot to it but actually designing a robot and getting a whole data engine and everything behind it to work is actually a really hard problem so it makes sense to go after general interfaces that okay they they are not perfect for anyone given task but they actually have the generality of just with the prompt with English able to do something across and so I think it makes a lot of sense to go after a general interface in the physical world and I think it's a very difficult project it means going to take time but I've seen no other no other company that can execute on that vision I think it's going to be amazing it like basically physical labor like if you think transportation is a large market try physical labor but it's not just physical labor to me the thing that's also exciting is the social robotics so the the relationship will have on different levels with those robots yeah that's why I was really excited to see optimists like people have criticized me for the excitement but I've worked with a lot of research labs that do humanoid legate robots boss and dynamics unitary a lot there's a lot of companies that do legate robots but that's the the elegance of the movement is a tiny tiny part of the big picture so integrating the two big exciting things to me about Tesla doing humanoid or any legate robots is clearly integrating into the data engine so the the data engine aspect so the actual intelligence for the perception and the and the control and the planning and all that kind of stuff integrating into the huge the fleet that you mentioned right and then speaking of fleet the second thing is the mass manufacturers just knowing culturally driving towards a simple robot that's cheap to produce at scale and doing that well having experience to do that well that changes everything that's what that's a very different culture and style than boss and dynamics who by the way those those robots are just the way they move it's like it'll be a very long time before Tesla could achieve the smoothness of movement but that's not what it's about it's it's about it's about the entirety of the system like we talked about the data engine and the fleet and that's super exciting even the initial sort of models but that too was really surprising that in a few months you can get a prototype yeah and the reason that happened very quickly is as you alluded to there's a ton of copy-based from what's happening on the autopilot a lot the amount of expertise that like came out of the woodworks at Tesla for building the human robot was incredible to see like basically Elon said at one point we're doing this and then next day basically like all these CAD models started to appear and people talking about like the supply chain and manufacturing and people showed up with like screwdrivers and everything like the other day and started to like put together the body and I was like whoa like all these people exist at Tesla and fundamentally building a car is actually not that different from building a robot the same and that is true not just for the hardware pieces and also let's not forget hardware not just for demo but manufacturing of that hardware at scale it's like a whole different thing but for software as well basically this robot currently thinks it's a car it's gonna have a mid-life crisis it's something it thinks it's a car some of the earlier demos actually we were talking about potentially doing them outside in the parking lot because that's where all of the computer vision was like working out of the box instead of like inside but all the operating system everything just copy-paste computer vision mostly copy-paste I mean you have to retrain the neural nuts but the approach on everything and data engine and offline trackers and the way we go about the occupancy tracker and so on everything copy-paste you just need to retrain the neural nuts and then the planning control of course has to change quite a bit but there's a ton of copy-paste from what's happening at Tesla and so if you were to if you were to go with goal of like okay let's build a million human robots and you're not Tesla that's a lot to ask if you're Tesla it's actually like it's not that crazy and then the the follow-up question is then how difficult just like we're driving how difficult is the manipulation task such that it can have an impact at scale I think depending on the context the really nice thing about robotics is that unless you do a manufacturer and that kind of stuff is there is more room for error driving is so safety critical and so the and also time critical like that robot is a lot to move slower which is nice yes I think it's going to take a long time but the way you want to structure the development as you need to say okay it's going to take a long time how can I set up the product development roadmap so that I'm making revenue along the way I'm not setting myself up for a zero one loss function where it doesn't work until it works you don't want to be in that position you want to make it useful almost immediately and then you want to slowly deploy it and it's generalize it at scale and you want to set up your data engine your improvement loops the telemetry the evaluation the harness and everything and you want to improve the product over time incrementally and you're making revenue along the way that's extremely important because otherwise you cannot build these large undertakings just like don't make sense economically and also from the point of view of the team working on it they need the dopamine along the way they're not just going to make a promise about this being useful this is going to change the world in 10 years when it works this is not where you want to be you want to be in a place like I think auto-pulled this today where it's offering increased safety and and convenience of driving today people pay for it people like it people purchase it and then you also have the greater mission that you're working towards and you see that so the dopamine for the team that that was the source of happiness yes and percent you're deploying this people like it people drive it people pay for it they care about it there's all these two videos your grandma drives it she gives you feedback people like it people engage with it you engage with it huge do people that drive testless like recognize you and give you love like like hey thanks for the for the this nice feature that is doing yeah I think the tricky thing is like some people really love you some people unfortunately like you're working on something that you think is extremely valuable useful etc some people do hate you there's a lot of people who like hate me and the team and what everything the whole project and I think they Tesla drivers many cases they're not actually yeah that's that's actually makes me sad about humans or the current the ways that humans interact I think that's actually fixable I think humans want to be good to each other I think Twitter and social media is part of the mechanism that actually somehow makes the negativity more viral that it doesn't deserve like disproportionately add of like a viral viral boost yeah negativity but I got I wish people would just get excited about so suppress some of the jealousy some of the ego and just get excited for others and then there's a karma aspect to that you get excited for others they'll get excited for you same thing in academia if you're not careful there is a like a dynamical system there if you if you think of in silos and get jealous of somebody else being successful that actually perhaps counterintuitively least the less productivity of you as a community and you individually I feel like if you keep celebrating others that actually makes you more successful yeah and I think people haven't in depending on the industry haven't quite learned that yet yeah some people are also very negative and very vocal so they're very prominently featured but actually there's a ton of people who are cheerleaders but they're sound cheerleaders and when you talk to people just in the world they will tell you it's amazing it's great especially like people who understand how difficult it is to get the stuff working like people who have built products and makers and entrepreneurs like making making this work and changing something is is incredibly hard those people are more likely to cheerlead you well one of the things that makes me sad is some folks in the robotics community you know how don't do the cheerleading and they should there's a because they know how difficult they actually sometimes don't know how difficult it is to create a product that scale right yeah they actually deploy in the real world a lot of the development of robots and AI system is done on very specific small benchmarks and as opposed to real world conditions yes yeah I think it's really hard to work on robotics in academic setting or AI systems that apply in the real world you you've criticized you flourished and loved for time the image net the famed image net data set and a recently had some words of criticism that the academic research ML community gives a little too much love still to the image net or like those kinds of benchmarks can you can speak to the strengths and weaknesses of data sets used in machine learning research actually I don't know that I recall the specific instance where I was unhappy or criticizing image net I think image net has been extremely valuable it was basically a benchmark that allowed the deep learning community to demonstrate that deep neural works actually work it was there's a massive value in that so I think image net was useful but I'm basically it's become a bit of an emnist at this point so emnist is like little 228 by 28 grayscale digits there's kind of a joke data set that everyone like crushes there's still papers written on emnist though right maybe they should have strong papers like papers that focus on like how do we learn with the small amount of data that stuff yeah I could see that being helpful but not in sort of like a mainline computer vision research anymore of course I think the way I've heard you somewhere maybe I'm just imagining things but I think you said like image net was a huge contribution to the community for a long time and now it's time to move past those kinds of well image net has been crushed I mean you know the error rates are yeah we're getting like 90% accuracy in in 1000 classification way prediction and I've seen those images and it's like really high this really that's really good if I'm correctly the top five error rate is now like 1% or something given your experience with a gigantic real world data set would you like to see benchmarks move in a certain directions that the research community uses unfortunately I don't think academics currently have the next image net we've obviously I think we've crushed emnist we've basically kind of crushed image net and there's no next sort of big benchmark that the entire community rel is behind and uses you know for further development of these networks yeah what do it takes for data set to captivate the imagination of everybody like where they all get behind it that that could also need like a virus like a leader right yeah somebody with popularity I mean that yeah what did it imagine that take off is there is it just the accident of history it was the right amount of difficult it was the right amount of difficult and simple and interesting enough it just kind of like it was it was the right time for that kind of a data set question from Reddit what are your thoughts on the role of the synthetic data and game engines will play in the future of neural net model development I think as neural nets converge to humans the value of simulation to neural nets will be similar to value of simulation to humans so people use simulation for people use simulation because they can learn something in that kind of a system and without having to actually experience it but you're referring to the simulation we're doing our head is it no sorry simulation I mean like video games or you know other forms of simulation for various professionals well let me push back and that because maybe there's simulation that we do in our heads like simulate if I do this what do I think will happen okay that's like internal simulation yeah internal isn't that what we're doing as you assume it before we act oh yeah but that's independent from like the use of simulation in a sense of like computer games or using simulation for training set creation or is it independent or is it just loosely correlated because like uh isn't that useful to do like um counterfactual or like edge case simulation to like you know what happens if there's a new clear war what happens if there's you know like those kinds of things yeah that's a different simulation from like unrelenged that's how I interpreted the question oh so like simulation of the average case hmm is that what's unreal engine what what what what what what what do you mean by unreal engine so I guess simulating a world yeah physics of that world why is that different like because you also can add behavior to that world and you could try all kinds of stuff right I mean you could throw all kinds of weird things into it yeah so unreal engine is not just about simulate I mean I guess it is about to mean the physics of the world it's also doing something with that yeah the graphics the physics and the agents that you put into the environment and stuff like that yeah see I think you I feel like you said that it's not that important I guess for the future of AI development is that is that correct to interpret it either way I think humans use simulators for humans simulators and they find them useful and so computers will use simulators and find them useful okay so you're saying it's not I don't use simulators very often I play a video game every once in a while but I don't think I derive any wisdom about my own existence from from those video games this a momentary escape from reality versus a source of wisdom about reality so I don't so I think that's a very polite way of saying simulation is not that useful yeah maybe maybe not I don't see it as like a fundamental really important part of like training neural nets currently but I think as neural nets become more and more powerful I think you will need fewer examples to train additional behaviors and simulation is of course there's a domain gap in a simulation there's not the real world this likely something different but with a powerful enough neural net you need the domain gap can be bigger I think because neural net will sort of understand that even though it's not the real world it like has all this high level structure that I'm supposed to be learned from so the neural net will actually yeah we'll be able to leverage this aesthetic data better yes by closing the gap but understanding in which ways this is not real data exactly right to do better questions next time that was that was a question I'm just kidding all right so is it possible do you think speaking of MNIST to construct neural nets and training processes that require very little data so we've been talking about huge data sets like the internet for training I mean yeah one way to say that is like you said like the querying itself is another level of training I guess and that requires a little data yeah but do you see any value in doing research and kind of going down the direction of can we use very little data to train to construct a knowledge base 100 percent I just think like at some point you need a massive data set and then when you pre-training your massive neural net and get something that you know is like a GPT or something then you're able to be very efficient at training and you're returning new task so a lot of these GPTs you know you can do tasks like sentiment analysis or translation or so on just by being prompted with very few examples here's the kind of thing I want you to do like here's an input sentence here's the translation into German input sentence translation to German input sentence blank and the neural net will complete the translation to German just by looking at sort of the example you've provided and so that's an example of a very few shot learning in the activations of the neural net instead of the weights of the neural net and so I think basically just like humans neural nets will become very data efficient at learning any other new task but at some point you need a massive data set to pre-training your network to get that and probably we humans have something like that do we do we have something like that do we have a passive in the background background model constructing thing they just runs all the time in a self supervised way we're not conscious of it I think humans definitely I mean obviously we have we learn a lot during during our lifespan but also we have a ton of hardware that helps us initialize initialization coming from sort of evolution and so I think that's also a really big big component a lot of people in the field I think they just talk about the amounts of like seconds and the you know that the person has lived pretending that this is a taboo a larasah sort of like a zero initialization of a neural net and it's not like you can look at a lot of animals like for example a zebra's zebra's get born and they see and they can run there's zero trained data in their lifespan they can just do that so somehow I have no idea how evolution has found a way to encode these algorithms and these neural net initializations are extremely good into ATCGs and I have no idea how this works but apparently it's possible because here's approved by existence there's something magical about going from a single cell to an organism that is born to the first few years of life I kind of like the idea that the reason we don't remember anything about the first few years of our life is that it's a really painful process like it's a very difficult challenging training process yeah like intellectually like and maybe yeah I mean I don't why don't we remember any of that there might be some crazy training going on and that the maybe that's the background model training that is is very painful and so it's best for the system once it's trained not to remember how it's constructed I think it's just like the hardware for long-term memory is just not fully developed sure I kind of feel like the first few years of offense is not actually like learning it's brain maturing yeah we're born premature there's a theory along those lines because of the birth canal and this one of the brain and so we're born premature and then the first few years were just the brains maturing and then there's some learning eventually it's my current view on it what do you think do you think neural nets can have long-term memory like that approach is something like humans do you think do you think there needs to be another meta architecture on top of it to add something like a knowledge base that learns facts about the world and all that kind of stuff yes but I don't know to what extent it will be explicitly constructed it might take unintuitive forms where you are telling the GPT like hey you have a you have a declarative memory bank to which you can store and retrieve data from and whenever you encounter some information that you find useful just save it to your memory bank and here's an example of something you have retrieved and he says how you say it and here's how you load from it you just say load whatever you teach it in text in English and then it might learn to use a memory bank from from that oh so the neural net is the architecture for the background model the the the base thing and then yeah everything else is just not top over that so it's not just text right it's you're giving it gadgets and gizmos so you're teaching some kind of a special language by which we can it can save arbitrary information and retrieve it at a later time and you're you're telling about these special tokens and how to arrange them to use these interfaces it's like hey you can use a calculator here's how you use it just do five three plus four one equals and when equals is there a calculator will actually read out the answer and you don't have to calculate it yourself and you just like tell it in English this might actually work do you think in that sense goto is interesting the the deep mind system that it's not just no language but actually throws it all in the same pile images actions all that kind of stuff that's basically what we're moving towards yeah I think so so goto is is very much a kitchen sink of approach to like reinforcement learning lots of different environments with a single fixed a transformer model right I think it's a very sort of early result in that in that realm but I think yeah it's a long the lines of what I think things will eventually look like right so this is the early days of a system that eventually will look like this like from a rich is rich sudden perspective yeah I'm not super huge fan of I think all these interfaces that like look very different I would want everything to be normalized into the same API so for example screen pixels very same API instead of having like different world environments that are very different physics and joint configurations and appearances and whatever and you're having some kind of special tokens for different games that you can plug I'd rather just normalize everything to a single interface so it looks the same to the neural not if that makes sense so it's all going to be pixel-based pong in the end I think so okay let me ask you about your own personal life a lot of people want to know you're one of the most productive and brilliant people in the history of AI what is the productive day in the life of Andre Kapati look like what time do you wake up you look as imagine some kind of dance between the average productive day and a perfect productive day so the perfect productive day is the thing which strive towards in the average is kind of what it kind of converges to give all the mistakes and human eventualities and so on yeah so what times you wake up by your morning person I'm not a morning person I'm a night owl for sure is it stable or not that's semi-stable like eight or nine or something like that during my PhD it was even later I used to go to sleep usually at 3 a.m. I think the a.m. hours are precious a very interesting time to work because everyone is asleep at at 8 a.m. or 7 a.m. the east coast is awake so there's already activity there's already some text messages whatever their stuff happening you can go on like some news website and their stuff happening it's distracting at 3 a.m. everything is totally quiet and so you're not going to be bothered and you have solid chunks of time to do work so I like those periods night owl by default and then I think like productive time basically what I like to do is you need you need to like build some momentum on the problem without too much distraction and you need to load your RAM your working memory with that problem and then you need to be obsessed with it when you're taking shower when you're falling asleep you need to be obsessed with the problem and it's fully in your memory and you're ready to wake up and work on it right there so it is a skill of is this in a scale temporal scale of a single day or a couple of days a week a month so I can't talk about one day basically in isolation because it's a whole process when I want to get productive in the problem I feel like I need a span of a few days where I can really get in on that problem and I don't want to be interrupted and I'm going to just be completely obsessed with that problem and that's where I do most of my good workouts you've done a bunch of cool like little projects in a very short amount of time very quickly so that requires you just focusing on it yeah basically I need to load my working memory with the problem and I need to be productive because there's always like a huge fixed cost to approaching any problem you know like I was struggling with this for example at Tesla because I want to work on like small side project but okay you first need to figure out okay I need to SSH into my cluster I need to bring up a VS code editor so I can like work on this I need to I run into some stupid error because of some reason like you're not at a point where you can be just productive right away you are facing barriers and so it's about really removing all that barrier and you're able to go into the problem and you have the full problem loaded in your memory and somehow avoiding distractions of all different forms like news stories emails but also distractions from other interesting projects that you previously worked out are currently working on and so on yeah you just want to really focus your mind and I mean I can take some time off for distractions and in between but I think it can't be too much you know most of your day is sort of like spent on that problem and then you know I drink coffee I had my morning routine I look at some news Twitter hacker news Wall Street Journal etc so it's great so basically wake up you have some coffee are you trying to get to work as quickly as possible do do take in this diet of like what the hell is happening in the world first I am I do find it interesting to know about the world I don't know that it's useful or good but it is part of my routine right now so I do read through a bunch of news articles and I want to be informed and I'm suspicious of it I'm suspicious of the practice but currently that's where I am. Oh you mean suspicious about the positive effect yeah of that practice on your productivity and your well-being is my well-being psychologically and also on your ability to deeply understand the world because there's a bunch of sources of information you're not really focused on deeply integrating that's loaded distracting you're yeah in terms of a perfectly productive day for how long of a stretch of time in one session do you try to work and focus anything a couple hours is it one hours at 30 minutes is 10 minutes I can probably go like a small few hours and then any some breaks in between for like food and stuff and yeah but I think like it's still really hard to accumulate hours I was using a tracker that told me exactly how much time I spent coding any one day and even on a very productive day I still spent only like six or eight hours yeah and it's just because there's so much padding commute talking to people food etc there's like the cost of life just living and sustaining and homeostasis and just maintaining yourself as a human is very high and and there seems to be a desire within the human mind to to participate in society that creates that padding yeah the most productive days I've ever had is just completely from start to finish just tuning out everything yeah and just sitting there and then and then you could do more than six and eight hours yeah is there some wisdom about what gives you strength to do like tough days of long focus yeah just like whenever I get obsessed about a problem something just needs to work some she just needs to exist it needs to exist and you're so you're able to deal with bugs and programming issues and technical issues and design decisions that turn out to be the wrong ones you're able to think through all that given given that you want to think to exist yeah it needs to exist and then I think to me also a big factor is you know our other humans are going to appreciate it are they going to like it that's a big part of my motivation if I'm helping humans and they seem happy they say nice things they tweet about it or whatever that gives me pleasure because I'm doing something useful so like you do see yourself sharing it with the world like with San Github with the blog posts or the videos yeah I was thinking about it like suppose I did all these things but did not share them I don't think I would have the same motivation that I can build up you enjoy the feeling of other people gaining value and happiness from the stuff you've created yeah what about diet is there I saw you play in a minute fast you fast is that help with everything with the things you played was been most beneficial to the your ability to mentally focus on and just meant the month of productivity and happiness you still fast yeah I still fast but I do intermittent fasting but really what it means at the end of the day is I skip breakfast yeah so I do 18 six roughly by default when I'm in my steady state if I'm traveling or doing something else I will break the rules but in my steady state I do 18 six so I eat only from 12 to 6 not a hard rule and I break it often but that's my default and then yeah I've done a bunch of random experiments for the most part right now where I've been for the last year and a half I want to say is I'm plant-based or plant-forward I heard plant-forward it sounds better I don't actually know the differences but it sounds better in my mind but it just means I prefer plant-based food and raw or cooked or I prefer cooked and plant-based so plant-based forgive me I don't actually know how wide the category of plant entails well plant-based just means that you're not a little bit about is and you can flex and you just prefer to eat plants and you know you're not making you're not trying to influence other people and if someone is you come to someone's house party and they serve you a steak that they're really proud of you will eat it yes right you know that's beautiful I mean that's I'm the flip side of that but I'm very sort of flexible have you tried doing one meal a day I have accidentally not consistently but I've accidentally had that I don't I don't like it I think it makes me feel not good it's too it's too much too much of a hit yeah and so currently I have about two meals a day 12 and six I do that nonstop from doing you know do it one meal a day okay it's interesting it's interesting feeling if you ever fasted along with it a day yeah I've done a bunch of water fasts because I'm curious what happens what I'm anything interesting yeah I would say so I mean you know what's interesting is that you're hungry for two days and then I starting day three or so you're not hungry it's like such a weird feeling because you haven't eaten in a few days and you're not hungry is that weird it's really one one of the many weird things about human biology yeah it figures something out it finds finds another source of energy or something like that or or relaxes the system I don't know how the body is like you're hungry you're hungry and then it just gives up it's like okay I guess we're fasting now there's nothing and then it's just kind of like focuses on trying to make you not hungry and you know not feel the the damage of that and trying to give you some space to figure out the food situation so are you still to this day most productive at night I would say I am but it is really hard to maintain my PhD schedule especially when I was say working at Tesla and so on it's a nonstarter so but even now like you know people want to meet for various events they society lives in a certain period of time yeah and you sort of have to like work so that's it's hard to like do a social thing and then after that return and do work yeah it's just really hard that's why I tried to do social thing that's right not to do too much drinking so I can return and continue doing work but a Tesla is there is there conversions like in a Tesla but any company is there a conversion to someone's a schedule or is there more is that how humans behave when the collaborate I need to learn about this yeah do they try to keep us consistent schedule you're all the way at the same time I'm gonna do try to create a routine and I try to create a steady state in which I'm comfortable in so I have a morning routine I have a day routine I try to keep things through a steady state and things are predictable and then you can sort of just like your body just sort of like sticks to that and if you try to stress that a little too much it will create you know when you're traveling and you're dealing with jet lag you're not able to really ascend to you know where you need to go yeah yeah that's what you do about humans with the habits and stuff what are your thoughts on work life balance throughout a human lifetime so Tesla in part was known for sort of pushing people to their limits in terms of what they're able to do in terms of what they're trying to do in terms of how much they work all that kind of stuff yeah I mean I will say Tesla gets old too much bad rep for this because what's happening is Tesla is it's a bursty environment so I would say the baseline my only point of reference is Google where I've interned three times and I saw what it's like inside Google and deep mind I would say the baseline is higher than that but then there's a punctuated equilibrium where once in a while there's a fire and someone like people work really hard and so that it's spiky and bursty and then all the stories get collected about the bursts yeah and then it gives the appearance of like total insanity but actually it's just a bit more intense environment and there are fires and sprints and so I think you know it definitely though I I would say it's a more intense environment than something you would get like in your person forget all that just in your own personal life what do you think about the happiness of a human being a brilliant person like yourself about finding a balance between work and life or is such a thing not a good thought experiment yeah I think I think balance is good but I also love to have sprints that are out of distribution and that's when I think I've been pretty creative and as well so sprints out of distribution means that most of the time you you have a yeah quote unquote balance I have balance most of the time and then I like being obsessed with something once in a while once in a while is what once a week once a month once a year yeah probably like say once a month or something yeah and that's when we get and you get hub repo for my yeah that's when you're like really care about a problem it must exist this will be awesome you're obsessed with it and now you can't just do it on that day you need to pay the fixed cost of getting into the groove yeah and then you need to stay there for a while and then society will come and they will try to mess with you and they will try to distract you yeah yeah the worst thing is like a person who's like I just need five minutes of your time yeah this is the cost of that is not five minutes and society needs to change how it thinks about just five minutes of your time right it's never it's never just one minute just just 30s just a quick step deal are you being so yeah no uh what's your computer setup what what's like the perfect do you are you somebody that's flexible to no matter what laptop four screens yeah or do you prefer a certain setup that you're most productive um I guess the one that I'm familiar with is one large screen uh 27 inch um and my laptop on the side what operating system I do max that's my primary for all tasks I would say OSX but when you're working on deep learning everything is Linux your SSH into a cluster and you're working remotely but what about the actual development like they're using the IDE yeah you would use uh I think a good way is you just run VS code um my favorite editor right now on your Mac uh but you are actually you have a remote folder through SSH um so the actual files that you're manipulating are on the clusters somewhere else so what's the best IDE uh VS code what else the people so I use emax still let's go uh so it may be cool I don't know if it's maximum productivity um so what do you recommend in terms of editors you work the lot of software engineers editors for Python C++ machine learning applications I think the current answer is VS code currently I believe that's the best um IDE it's got a huge amount of extensions it has a GitHub co-pilot um integration which I think is very valuable what do you think about the co-pilot integration I was actually uh I got to talk a bunch with Guido and Rasm was the creative Python and he loves co-pilot you like he programs a lot with it yeah uh do you yeah use co-pilot I love it and uh it's free for me but I would pay for it yeah I think it's very good and the utility that I found with it was isn't isn't I would say there's a learning curve and you need to figure out when it's helpful and when to pay attention to its outputs and when it's not going to be helpful where you should not pay attention to it because if you're just reading at suggestions all the time it's not a good way of interacting with it but I think I was able to sort of like mold myself to it I find it's very helpful number one in uh copy paste and replace some parts so I don't um when the pattern is clear it's really good at completing the pattern and number two sometimes it suggests APIs that I'm not aware of uh so it tells you about something that you didn't know so and that's an opportunity to discover and you know it's an opportunity to so I would never take co-pilot code as given I almost always uh copy a copy face into a Google search and you see what this function is doing and then you're like oh it's actually actually exactly what I need yeah thank you co-pilot so you learned something so it's in part of search engine apart um maybe getting the exact syntax correctly that once you see it yeah it's that and be hard things like once you see it you know yes exactly exactly like you yourself you can very strong you can verify efficiently but you you can't generate efficiently and co-pilot really I mean it's it's autopilot for programming right and currently is doing the link following which is like the simple copy paste and sometimes suggest uh but over time it's going to become more and more autonomous and so the same thing will play out in not just coding but actually across many many different things probably coding is an important one right writing programs yeah what how do you see the future of that developing uh the program synthesis like being able to write programs that are more and more complicated because right now it's human supervised in interesting ways yes like what it feels like the transition will be very painful my mental model for it is the same thing will happen as with the autopilot uh so currently is doing the link following is doing some simple stuff and eventually we'll be doing autonomy and people will have to intervene less and less and there could be like you like testing mechanisms like if it writes a function and that function looks pretty damn correct but how do you know it's correct because you're like getting lazy and lazy as a programmer uh huh like your ability to because like little bugs but I guess it won't make little no it will it it co-pilot will make out off by one subtle bugs it has done that to me but do you think future systems will or is it really the off by one is actually a fundamental challenge of programming in that case it wasn't fundamental and I think things can improve but uh yeah I think humans have to supervise I am nervous about people not supervising what comes out and uh what happens to for example the proliferation of bugs in all of our systems I'm nervous about that but I think there will probably be some other co-pilots for bug finding and stuff like that at some point because there will be like a lot more automation for uh man so it's like a program uh co-pilot that generates a compiler one that does a linter yes one that does like a type checker yeah it's a committee of like a GPT sort of like and then there'll be like a manager for the committee yeah and then there'll be somebody that says a new version of this is needed we need to regenerate it yeah there were 10 GPT's they were forwarded and gave 50 suggestions and other one looked at it and picked a few that they like a bug one looked at it and it was like it's probably a bug they got re-ranked by some other thing and then a final ensemble GPT comes in it's like okay given everything you guys have told me this is probably the next token you know the feeling is the number of programmers in the world has been growing and growing very quickly yeah do you think it's possible that it'll actually level out and drop to like a very low number with this kind of world because then you'll be doing software 2.0 programming um and you'll be doing this kind of generation of co-pilot type systems programming but you won't be doing the old school software 1.0 programming I don't currently think that they're just going to replace you in programmers it's i'm so hesitant saying stuff like this right because this is going to be replacing five years i know it's going to show that like this is where we thought because i agree with you but i think it might be very surprised right like what what are the next i i what's your sense of where we stand with language models like does it feel like the beginning or the middle or the end the beginning 100 percent i think the big question in my mind is for sure GPT will be able to program quite well competently and so on how do you steer the system you still have to provide some guidance to what you actually are looking for and so how do you steer it and how do you say how do you talk to it how do you um audit it and verify that what is done is correct and how do you like work with this and it's as much not just an AI problem but a UI UX problem yeah um so beautiful fertile ground for so much interesting work uh for vs code plus plus where you're not just this not just human programming anymore it's amazing yeah so you're interacting with the system so not just one prompt but it's iterative prompting yeah you're trying to figure out having a conversation with the system yeah that actually i mean to me that's super exciting to have a conversation with the program i'm writing yeah yeah maybe at some point you're just conversing with it's like okay here's what i want to do actually this variable maybe it's not even that level is variable but you can also imagine like can you translate this to c++ and back to python yeah already kind of existence no but just like doing it as part of the program experience like i think i'd like to write this function as c++ or like you just keep changing for different different programs because of different syntax syntax maybe i want to convert this into a functional language yeah and so like you get to become multilingual as a programmer and dance back and forth officially yeah i mean i think the UI UX you xfid though is like still very hard to think through because it's not just about writing code on a page you have an entire developer environment you have a bunch of hardware on it you have some environmental variables you have some scripts that are running in a cron job like there's a lot going on to like working with computers and how do these systems setup environment flags and work across multiple machines and set up screen sessions and automate different processes like how all that works and is auditable by humans and so on is like massive question of a moment you've built archive sanity what is archive and what is the future of academic research publishing that you would like to see so archive is this pre-print server so if you have a paper you can submit it for publication to journals or conferences and then wait six months and then maybe get a decision pass or fail or you can just upload it to archive and then people can tweet about it three minutes later and then everyone sees it everyone reads it and everyone can profit from it in their own way you can cite it and it has an official look to it it feels like a publication process yeah it feels different than if you just put it in a blog post oh yeah yeah i mean it's a paper and usually the the bar is higher for something that you would expect on archive as opposed to and something you would see in a blog post or the culture created the bar because you can probably yes host a pretty crappy fix or an archive so what was that make you feel like what was that make you feel about peer review so rigorous peer review by two three experts versus the peer review of the community right as it's written yeah basically I think the community is very well able to peer review things very quickly on Twitter and I think maybe it just has to do something with AI machine learning field specifically though I feel like things are more easily auditable and the verification is easier potentially than the verification somewhere else so it's kind of like you can think of these scientific publications as like little blockchains where everyone's building on each other's work and setting each other and you sort of have AI which is kind of like this much faster and loose blockchain but then you have and any one individual entries like very very cheap to make and then you have other fields where maybe that model doesn't make as much sense and so I think in AI at least things are pretty easily very viable and so that's why when people upload papers there are a really good idea on someone people can try it out like the next day and they can be the final arbiter of whether it works or not on their problem and the whole thing just moves significantly faster so I kind of feel like academia still has a place sort of this like conference journal process still has a place but it's sort of like and it lacks behind I think and it's a bit more maybe higher quality process but it's not sort of the place where you will discover cutting edge work anymore yeah it used to be the case when I was starting my PhD that you go to conferences and journals and you discuss all the latest research now when you go to conference or journal like no one discusses anything that's there because it's already like three generations ago irrelevant which makes me sad about like Deep Mind for example where they still publish in nature and these big prestigious I mean there's still value I suppose to the prestigious that comes with these big venues but the result is that they they'll announce some breakthrough performance and it will take like a year to actually publish the details I mean and those details in if they were published immediately wouldn't inspire the community to move in certain directions or they would speak up the rest of the community but I don't know to what extent that's part of their objective function also that's true just not just the prestige a little bit of the delay is part yeah they certainly Deep Mind specifically has been working in the regime of having slightly higher quality basically process and latency and publishing those papers that way another question from Reddit do you or have you suffered from imposter syndrome being the director of AI Tesla uh being this person when you're a Stanford where like the world looks at you as the expert in AI to teach yeah teach the world about machine learning when I was leaving Tesla after five years I spent a ton of time in meeting rooms uh and you know I would read papers in the beginning when I joined Tesla I was writing code and then I was writing less and less code and I was reading code and then I was reading less and less code and so this is just a natural progression that happens I think and uh definitely I would say near the tail end that's when it sort of like starts to hit you a bit more that you're supposed to be an expert but actually the source of truth is the code that people are writing the GitHub and the actual the actual code itself uh and you're not as familiar with that as you used to be and so I would say maybe there's something like insecurity there yeah that's actually pretty profound that a lot of the insecurity has to do with not writing the code in the computer science space like that because that is the truth that that that that right there code is the source of truth the papers and everything else it's a high level summary I don't uh yeah just a high level summary but at the end of the day you have to read code it's impossible to translate all that code into actual uh you know uh paper form uh so when when things come out especially when they have a source code available that's my favorite place to go so like I said you're one of the greatest teachers of machine learning AI ever uh from CS231N to today what advice would you give to beginners interested in getting into machine learning beginners are often focused on like what to do and I think the focus should be more like how much you do so I I am kind of like believer on a high level in this uh 10,000 hours kind of concept where you just kind of have to just pick the things where you can spend time and you you care about and you're interested in you literally have to put in 10,000 hours of work um it doesn't even like matter as much like where you put it and you're you'll iterate and you'll improve and you'll waste some time I don't know if there's a better way you need to put in 10,000 hours but I think it's actually really nice because I feel like there's some sense of the feminism about uh being an expert at a thing if you spend 10,000 hours you can literally pick an arbitrary thing and I think if you spend 10,000 hours of deliberate effort and work you actually will become an expert at it and so I think it's kind of like a nice thought um and so uh basically I would focus more on like are you spending 10,000 hours and I focus on so and then thinking about what kind of mechanisms maximize your likelihood of getting to 10,000 hours exactly which for us silly humans means probably forming a daily habit of like every single day actually doing the thing whatever helps you so I do think to a large extent is a psychological problem for yourself yeah uh one other thing that I help that I think is helpful for the psychology of it is many times people compare themselves to others in the area I think it's very harmful only compare yourself to you from some time ago like say a year ago are you better than you year ago this is the only way to think um and I think this then you can see your progress and it's very motivating that's so interesting that focus on the quantity of hours because I think a lot of people uh in the beginner stage but I actually throughout get paralyzed by uh the choice like which one do I pick this path or this path yeah like they'll literally get paralyzed but like which ide to use well they're worried yeah they'll worry about all these things but the thing is some of the you you will waste time doing something wrong yes you will eventually figure out it's not right you will accumulate scar tissue and next time you'll grow stronger because next time you'll have the scar tissue and next time you'll learn from it and now next time you come to a similar situation you'll be like oh I I messed up I've spent a lot of time working on things that never materialize into anything and I have all that scar tissue and I have some intuitions about what was useful what wasn't useful how things turned out so all those mistakes where uh we're not dead work you know so I just think you should did you just focus on working what have you done what have you done last week that's a good question actually to ask on uh for for a lot of things that's just machine learning um it's a good way to cut the uh the way I forgot what the term we used but the fluff the blubber whatever the uh the inefficiencies in life uh what do you love about teaching you seem to find yourself often in the like draw into teaching you're very good at it but you're also drawn to it I mean I don't think I love teaching I love happy humans and happy humans like when I teach yes I wouldn't say I hate teaching I tolerate teaching but it's not like the act of teaching that I like it's yeah it's that um you know I I have some I have something I'm actually okay at it yes I'm okay at teaching and people appreciate a lot yeah and uh so I'm just happy to try to be helpful and uh teaching itself is not like the most I mean it's really it's can be really annoying frustrating I was working on a bunch of lectures just now I was reminded back to my days of 231 and just how much work it is to create some of these materials and make them good the amount of iteration and thought and you go down blind alleys and just how much you change it so creating something good um in terms of like educational values really hard and uh it's not fun there's difficult so for people to definitely go watch your new stuff you put out their lectures we actually building the thing like from like you said the code is truth so discussing uh back propagation by building it by looking through and just the whole thing so how difficult is that to prepare for I think it's a really powerful way to teach how did you have to prepare for that or are you just live thinking through it I will typically do like say three takes and then I take like the the better take uh so I do multiple takes now I take some of the better takes and then I just build out a lecture that way uh sometimes I have to delete 30 minutes of content because it just went down the alley that I didn't like too much there's a bunch of iteration and it probably takes me you know somewhere around 10 hours to create one hour of content to get one hour it's interesting I mean uh is it difficult to go back to the like the basics do you draw a lot of like wisdom from going back to the basics yeah going back to back propagation loss functions where they come from and one thing I like about teaching a lot honestly is it definitely strengthens your understanding uh so it's not a purely altruistic activity it's a way to learn if you have to explain something to someone uh you realize you have gaps in knowledge uh and so I even surprised myself in those lectures like also the result will obviously look at this and then the result doesn't look like it and I'm like okay I thought I understood this yeah but that's why it's really cool to literally code you run it in a notebook and it gives you a result and you're like oh wow yes and like actual numbers actual input actual actual actual code yeah it's not mathematical symbols etc the source of truth is the code it's not slides it's just like let's build it it's beautiful you're a rare human in that sense uh what advice would you give to researchers uh trying to develop and publish the idea that have a big impact in the world of AI so maybe um undergrads maybe early graduate students yeah I'm gonna say like they definitely have to be a little bit more strategic than I had to be as a PhD student because of the way AI is evolving it's going the way of physics where yeah you know in physics you used to be able to do experiments on your bench top and everything was great and you could make progress and now you have to work in like LHC or like CERN and and so AI is going in that direction as well um so there's certain kinds of things that's just not possible to do on the bench top anymore and uh I think um that didn't used to be the case at the time you still think that there's like GAN type papers to be written where like uh like very simple idea there requires just one computer to illustrate a simple example I mean one example that's been very influential recently is diffusion models the fusion models are amazing the fusion models are six years old uh for the longest time people who are kind of ignoring them as far as I can tell and they're an amazing generative model especially in uh in images and so stable diffusion and so on it's all the fusion based uh the fusion is new it was not there and came from well it came from Google but a researcher could have come up with it in fact some of the first actually know those came from Google as well uh but a researcher could come up with that in an academic institution yeah what do you find most fascinating about diffusion models so from the societal impact of the technical architecture what I like about diffusion is it works so well is that surprising to you the amount of the variety almost the novelty of the synthetic data is generating yes so the stable diffusion images are incredible it's the speed of improvement in generating images has been insane uh we went very quickly from generating like tiny digits to tiny faces and it all looked messed up and now we were stable diffusion and that happened very quickly there's a lot that academia can still contribute uh you know the for example um flash attention is a very efficient kernel for running the attention operation inside the transformer that came from academic environment it's a very clever way to structure the kernel uh that do the duster calculation uh so it doesn't materialize the attention matrix um and so there's I think there's still like lots of things to contribute but you have to be just more strategic do you think neural networks can be made to reason uh yes do you think they're already reason yes what's your definition of reasoning uh information processing so in the way the humans think through a problem and come up with novel ideas it it feels like reasoning yeah so the the novelty I don't want to say but out of out of distribution ideas you think it's possible yes and I think we're seeing that already in the current neural nets you're able to remix the training set information into true generalization in some sense that doesn't appear it doesn't appear in the way in the training set like you're doing something interesting algorithmically you're manipulating you know some symbols and you're coming up with some correct unique answer and then you setting what would uh illustrate to you holy shit this thing is definitely thinking to me thinking or reasoning is just information processing and generalization and I think the neural nets already do that today so being able to perceive the world or perceive the whatever the inputs are and to make uh predictions based on that or actions based on that that's that's reason yeah you're giving correct answers in novel settings uh by manipulating information you've learned the correct algorithm you're not doing just some kind of a lookup table on the earth neighbor search let me ask you about aji what what are some moonshirt ideas you think might make significant progress towards aji so maybe another way is what are the big blockers that we're missing now so basically I am fairly bullish on our ability to build aji ice uh basically automated systems that we can interact with and are very human like and we can interact with them in a digital realm or a physical realm currently it seems most of the models that sort of do these sort of magical tasks are in a text realm um I think uh as I mentioned I'm suspicious that text realm is not enough to actually build full understanding of the world I do actually think you need to go into pixels and understand the physical world and how it works so I do think that we need to extend these models to consume images and videos and train on a lot more data that is multimodal in that way do you think you need to touch the world to understand it also well that's the big open question I would say in my mind is if you also require the embodiment and the ability to uh sort of interact with the world run experiments and um have a data of that form then you need to go to optimus or something like that and so I would say optimus in some way is like a hedge um in a g i because it seems to me that it's possible that just having data from the internet is not enough if that is the case then optimus may lead to a g i uh because optimus would to me there's nothing beyond optimus you have like this humanoid form factor that can actually like do stuff in the world you can have millions of them interacting with humans and so on and uh if that doesn't give a rise to a g i at some point like i'm not sure what will um so from a completeness perspective i think that's the uh that's a really good platform but it's a much more harder platform because uh you are dealing with atoms and you need to actually like build these things and integrate them into society so i think that path takes longer uh but it's much more certain and then there's a path of the internet and just like training these compression models effectively uh on uh trying to compress all the internet and uh that might also give um these agents as well compressed the internet but also interact with the internet yeah so it's not obvious to me in fact i suspect you can reach a g i without ever entering the physical world and which is a little bit more concerning because it might that results in happening faster so it just feels like we're like in boiling water we won't know as it's happening i i would like to i'm not afraid of a g i i'm excited about it there's always concerns but i would like to know when it happens yeah or and have like hints about when it happens like a year from now it will happen that kind of thing yeah i just feel like in the digital realm it just might happen yeah i think all we have available to us because no one has built a g i again so all we have available to us is uh is there enough fertile ground on the periphery i would say yes and we have the progress so far which has been very rapid and uh there are next steps that are available and so i would say uh yeah it's quite likely that will be interacting with digital entities how do you know that we somebody's ability it's going to be a slow i think it's going to be a slow incremental transition it's going to be product based and focused it's going to be get top copial getting better and then uh gpt's helping you write and then these oracles that you can go to with mathematical problems i think we're on a on a verge of being able to ask very complex questions and chemistry physics math of these oracles and have them complete solutions so a g i to use primarily focused on intelligence so consciousness doesn't enter into uh into it so in my mind consciousness is not a special thing you will you will figure out and bolt on i think it's an emergent phenomenon of a large enough and complex enough um generative model sort of so um if you have a complex enough world model uh that understands the world then it also understands its predicament in the world as being a language model which to me is a form of consciousness or self awareness and so in order to understand the world deeply you probably have to integrate yourself into the world yeah and in order to interact with humans and other living beings consciousness is a very useful tool i think consciousness is like a modeling insight modeling insight yeah it's a you have a powerful enough model of understanding the world that you actually understand that you are an entity in it yeah but there's also this um perhaps just the narrative we tell ourselves there's a it feels like something to experience the world the hard problem of consciousness yeah but that could be just the narrative that we tell ourselves yeah i don't think well yeah i think it will emerge i think it's going to be something uh very boring like we'll be talking to these uh digital ais they will claim their conscious they will appear conscious they will do all the things that you would expect of other humans and uh it's going to just be a stalemate i i think there will be a lot of actual fascinating ethical questions like supreme court level questions of whether you're allowed to turn off a conscious AI if you're allowed to build the conscious AI um maybe there would have to be the same kind of the base that you have around um sorry to bring up a political topic but you know abortion uh which is the deeper question with abortion uh is what is life and the deep question with AI is also what is life and what is conscious and i think they'll be very fascinating to bring up you might become illegal to build systems that are capable like of such level of intelligence that consciousness would emerge and therefore the capacity to suffer would emerge and somebody a system that says no please don't kill me um well that's what the lambda compute the lambda chatbot already told um this google engineer right like it was talking about not wanting to die or so on so that might become illegal to do that right right because otherwise you might have a lot a lot of creatures that don't want to die and they will uh you can just spawn in to your someone cluster and then that might lead to like horrible consequences because then there might be a lot of people that secretly love murder and they'll start practicing murder on those systems i mean there's just i to me all of this stuff just brings a beautiful mirror to the human condition and human nature will get to explore it and that's what like the best of uh the supreme court of all the different debates we have about ideas of what it means to be human we get to ask those deep questions that would be asking throughout human history there's always been the other in human history uh where the good guys and that's the bad guys and we're going to you know throughout human history let's murder the bad guys and the same will probably happen with robots it'll be the other at first and then we'll get to ask questions of what does it mean to be alive what does it mean to be conscious yeah and i think there's some canary in the coal mines even with what we have today i'm and uh you know like for example these there's these like waifus that you like work with and some people are trying to like this company is going to shut down but this person really like yeah love their waifu and like it's trying to like port it somewhere else and like it's not possible and like i think like definitely uh people will have feelings towards towards these um systems because in some sense they are like a mirror of humanity because they are like sort of like a big average of humanity in a way that it's trained but we can that average we can actually watch it's nice to be able to interact with the big average of humanity yeah and do like a search query on it yeah yeah it's very fascinating and uh we can also of course also like shape it it's not just a pure average we can mess with the training data we can mess with the objective we can fine tune them in various ways uh so we have some um you know impact on what those systems look like if you want to achieve a g i um and you could have a conversation with her and ask her uh talk about anything maybe ask her a question what what kind of stuff would you would you ask i would have some practical questions one mind like uh do i or my loved ones really have to die uh what can we do about that um do you think it will answer clearly or would it answer poetically i would expect it to give solutions i would expect it to be like well i've read all of these textbooks and i know all these things that you've produced and it seems to me like here are the experiments that i think it would be useful to run next and here's some gene therapies that i think would be helpful and uh here are the kinds of experiments that you should run okay let's go with this thought experiment okay imagine that mortality is actually uh pre like our pre-requisite for happiness so if we become immortal we'll actually become deeply unhappy and the model is able to know that so what is it supposed to tell you stupid human about it yes you can become immortal but you will become deeply unhappy if the if the model is if the agi system is trying to empathize with you human what is it supposed to tell you that yes you don't have to die but you're really not going to like it is that is it going to be deeply honest like there's a interstellar what is it the agi says like humans want 90% honesty so like you have to pick how honest do i want to answer these quite practical questions yeah i love agi interstellar by the way i think it's like such a sidekick to the entire story but at the same time it's like really interesting it's kind of limited in certain ways right yeah it's limited and i think that's only fine by the way i don't think uh i think it's fine and plausible to have a limited and imperfect agis is that the feature almost as an example like it has a fixed mind of compute on its physical body and it might just be that even though you can have a super amazing mega brain super intelligent AI you can also kind of like you know less intelligent AI so you can deploy in a power efficient way and then they're not perfect them i'd make mistakes no i meant more like say you had infinite compute and it's still good to make mistakes sometimes like in order to integrate yourself like um what is it going back to goodwill hunting robin Williams character says like the human imperfections that's the good stuff right yeah isn't it isn't that the like we don't want perfect we want flaws in part to to form connected with each other because it feels like something you can attach your feelings to the the the flaws and in that same way you want to AI that's flawed i don't know i feel like perfectionist but then you're saying okay yeah but that's not agi but see agi would need to be intelligent enough to give answers to humans and understand and i think perfect isn't something humans can't understand because even science doesn't give perfect answers there's always gabs and mysteries and i don't know i don't know if humans want perfect yeah i can imagine just having a conversation with this kind of oracle entity as you'd imagine them and yeah maybe it can tell you about you know based on my analysis of human condition you might not want this and hear some of the things that might but every every dumb human will say yeah yeah trust me i can give me the truth i can handle it but that's the beauty like people can choose also but then it's the old marshmallow test with the kids and so on i feel like too many people like can't handle the truth probably including myself like the deep truth of the human condition i don't i don't know if i can handle like like what if there's some darks that what if we are an alien science experiment and it realizes that what if it hacked i mean yeah i mean this is the matrix you know all over again i don't know i would what would i talk about i don't even yeah i probably i'll go with the safe for scientific questions at first that have nothing to do with my own personal life yeah immortality just like about physics and so on yeah to build up like let's see where is that or maybe see if it has a sense of humor that's another question would it be able to presumably in order to if it understands humans deeply would it able to generate yep to generate humor yeah i think that's actually a wonderful benchmark almost like is it able i think that's a really good point basically to it to make you laugh yeah if it's able to be like a very effective stand-up comedian that is doing something very interesting computationally i think being funny is extremely hard yeah because it's hard in a way like a touring test the original intent of the touring test is hard because you have to convince humans and there's nothing that's what that's what when you comedian talk about this like there's that this is deeply honest because if people can't help but laugh and if they don't laugh that means you're not funny if they laugh and you're showing you need a lot of knowledge to create to create humor about like the automation human condition and so on and then you need to be clever with it all right you mentioned if you movies you tweeted movies that have seen five plus times but i'm ready and willing to keep watching interstellar gladiator contact good will hunting the matrix load of the rings all three avatar fifth element so on goes on term a two mean girls i'm not gonna ask about that thank you guys this is great um what are some of the jump onto your memory that you love in why like you mentioned the matrix is as a computer person why do you love the matrix there's so many properties that make it like beautiful interesting so there's all these philosophical questions but then there's also a g i's and there's simulation and it's cool and there's you know the black you know the look of it the feel of it the feel of it the action the bullet time it was just like innovating in so many ways and then good well good will hunting way like that one yeah i just i really like this torture genius sort of character who's like grappling with whether or not he has like any responsibility or like what to do with this gift that he was given or like how to think about the whole thing and uh there's also dance between the genius and the the personal like what it means to love another human being and there's a lot of themes there it's just a beautiful movie and then the fatherly figure the mentor in in the psychiatrist and it like really like uh it messes with you you know there's some movies that's just like really mess with you uh on a deep level do you relate to that movie at all no it's not your fault as i said lower the rings that's self-explanatory terminator two which is interesting you rewatch that a lot is that better than terminator one you like you like Arnold is like that i do like terminator one as well uh i like terminator two a little bit more but in terms of like its surface properties do you think sky net is at all a possibility oh yes like the actual sort of autonomous weapon system kind of thing do you worry about that stuff i do worry i being used for war i 100% worry about it and so the i mean the you know some of these fears of ag is and how this will plan out i mean these will be like very powerful entities probably at some point and so for a long time there are going to be tools in the hands of humans you know people talk about like alignment of ag is and how to make the problem is like even humans are not aligned uh so uh how this will be used and what this is going to look like is um yes troubling so do you think it'll happen slow slow enough that we'll be able to as a as a human civilization think through the problems yes that's my hope is that it happens slowly enough and an open enough way where a lot of people can see and participate in it just figure out how to deal with this transition i think it was kind of interesting i draw a lot of inspiration from nuclear weapons because i sure thought it would be it would be fucked once they develop nuclear weapons but like it's almost like uh when uh when the systems are not so dangerous they destroy human civilization we deploy them and and learn the lessons and then we quickly if it's too dangerous we'll quickly quickly we might still deploy uh but you very quickly learn not to use them and so there'll be like this balance achieved humans are very clever as a species it's interesting we exploit the resources as much as we can but we don't we avoid destroying ourselves it seems like well i don't know about that actually i hope it continues um i mean i'm definitely like concerned and you click about nuclear weapons and so on not just as a result of the recent conflict even before that uh that's probably my number one concern for the society so if humanity uh destroys itself or destroys you know 90 percent of people that would be because of nukes i think so um and it's not even about full destruction to me it's bad enough if we reset society that would be like terrible it would be really bad and i can't believe we're like so close to it yeah it's like so crazy to me it feels like we might be a few tweets away from something like that yeah basically it's extremely unearving but and has been for me for a long time it seems unstable that world leaders just having a bad mood can like um take one step towards a bad direction and it escalates yeah and because of a collection of bad moods it can escalate without being able to stop yeah it's just a huge amount of power and then also with the proliferation i basically i don't i don't actually really see i don't actually know what the good outcomes are here uh so i'm definitely worried about that a lot and then agi is not currently there but i think at some point will more and more become uh something like it the the danger with agi even is that i think it's even less likely worse in a sense that uh there are good outcomes of agi and then the bad outcomes are like an epsilon away like a tiny one away and so i think um capitalism and humanity and so on will drive for the positive uh waste of using that technology but then if bad outcomes are just like a tiny like flip a minus sign away uh that's a really bad position to be in a tiny perturbation of the system results and the destruction of the human species so we are aligned to walk yeah i think in general it's really weird about like the dynamics of humanity and this explosion we've talked about is just like the insane coupling afforded by technology yeah and uh just the instability of the whole dynamical system i think it just doesn't look good honestly yes that explosion could be destructive or constructive and the probabilities are non zero in both both ends i'm gonna have to i do feel like i have to try to be optimistic and so on and yes i think even in this case i still am predominantly optimistic but there's definitely me too uh do you think will become a multi-point area species probably yes but i don't know if it's dominant feature of future humanity uh there might be some people on some planets and so on but i'm not sure if it's like yeah if it's like a major player in our culture and so on we still have to solve the drivers of self-destruction here on earth so just having a backup on Mars is not gonna solve the problem so by the way i love the backup on Mars i think that's amazing we should absolutely do that yes and i'm so thankful would you uh or would you go to Mars uh personally no i do like earth quite a lot okay i'll go to Mars i'll go to the field that's i'll tweet at you from maybe eventually i would once it's safe enough but i don't actually know if it's on my lifetime scale unless i can extend it by a lot i do think that for example a lot of people might disappear into virtual realities and stuff like that and i think that could be the major thrust of sort of the cultural development of humanity if it survives uh so it might not be it's just really hard to work in physical realm and go out there and i think ultimately all your experiences are in your brain yeah and so it's much easier to disappear into digital realm and i think people will find them more compelling easier safer more interesting so you're a little bit captivated by virtual reality by the possible worlds whether it's the metaverse or some other manifestation of that yeah yeah it's really interesting and so i'm interested just just talking a lot to karma where's the where's the thing that's currently preventing that yeah i'm to be clear i think what's interesting about the future is um it's not that i kind of feel like the variance in the human condition grows that's the primary thing that's changing it's not as much the mean of the distribution is like the variance of it so there will probably be people in Mars and there will be people in VR and there will people here on earth it's just like there will be so many more ways of being and so i kind of feel like i see it as like a spreading out of a human experience there's something about the internet that allows you to discover those little groups and you gravitate to something about your biology likes that kind of world that you find each other yeah and we'll have transhumanists and then we'll have the omnis and they're gonna everything is just gonna coexist yeah the cool thing about it because i've interacted with a bunch of internet communities is um they don't know about each other like you can have a very happy existence just like having a very close neck community and not knowing about each other i mean even you even sense this just having traveled to Ukraine there's they they don't know so many things about america yeah you like when you travel across the world i think you experience this too there are certain cultures that are like they have their own thing going on they don't and so you you can see that happening more and more and more and more in the future we have little communities yeah yeah i think so that seems to be the that seems to be how it's going right now and i don't see that trend like really reversing i think people are diverse and they're able to choose their own like path and existence and i sort of like celebrate that um and so we use spend some much time in the metaverse in the virtual reality or which community area i use the physicalist the the the the physical reality enjoyer or uh do you see drawing a lot of uh pleasure and fulfillment in the digital world yeah i think well currently the virtual reality is not that compelling uh i do think it can improve a lot but i don't really know to what extent maybe you know there's actually like even more exotic things you can think about with like neural links or stuff like that so um currently i kind of see myself as mostly a team human person i love nature yeah i love harmony i love people i love humanity i love emotions of humanity um and i i just want to be like in this like solar punk little utopia that's my happy place yeah my happy place is like uh people i love thinking about cool problems surround by a lush beautiful dynamic nature yeah and secretly high tech in places that count places like uh the use technology to empower that love for other humans and nature yeah i think a technology used like very sparingly uh i don't love when it sort of gets in the way of humanity in many ways uh i like just people being humans in the way we sort of like slightly evolved and prefer i think just by default people kept asking me because they they know you love reading are there particular books that you enjoyed that had an impact on you for silly or for profound reasons that you recommend you mentioned the vital question many of course i think in biology as an example the vital question is a good one anything by Nikolayn really uh life ascending i would say is like a bit more potentially uh representative is like a summary of a lot of the things he's been talking about i was very impacted by the selfish gene i thought that was a really good book that helped me understand altruism as an example and where it comes from and just realizing that you know the selection is on a level of genes was a huge insight for me at the time and it sort of like cleared up a lot of things for me what do you think about the the idea that ideas are the organisms the me yes love it hundred percent are you able to walk around with that notion for a while that that there is an evolutionary kind of process with ideas as well there absolutely is there's memes just like genes and they compete and they live in our brains it's beautiful are we silly humans thinking that we're the organisms is it possible that the primary organisms are the ideas yeah i would say like the the idea is kind of living the software of like our civilization in the in the minds and so on we think as humans that the hardware is the fundamental thing i human is a hardware entity yeah but it could be the software right yeah yeah i would say like there needs to be some grounding at some point to like a physical reality yeah but if we clone an Andre the software is a thing like is this thing that makes that thing special right yeah i guess i you're right but then cloning might be exceptionally difficult like there might be a deep integration between the software and the hardware in ways we don't quite understand well from the old shim from a view like what makes me special is more like the the gang of genes that are writing in my chromosomes i suppose right like they're they're they're replicating unit i suppose and no but that's just for a few the thing that makes you special sure well the reality is what makes you special is your ability to survive based on the software that runs on the hardware that was built by the genes um so the software is the thing that makes you survive not the hardware all right it's a little bit both you know it's just like a second layer it's a new second layer that hasn't been there before the brain they both they both coexist but there's also layers of the software i mean it's it's not there it's a it's a abstraction at a top of abstractions but okay so so soft as gene and a claim i would say sometimes books are like not sufficient i like to reach for textbooks sometimes um i kind of feel like books are for too much of a general consumption sometime and they just kind of like uh they're too high up in a lot of abstraction and it's not good enough yeah so i like textbooks i like the cell i think the cell was pretty cool uh that's why also i like the writing of necline is because he's pretty willing to step one level down and he doesn't uh yeah he's sort of he's willing to go there uh but he's also willing to sort of be throughout the stack so he'll go down to a lot of detail but then he will come back up and i think he is uh yeah basically i really appreciate that that's why i love college early college even high school just textbooks on the basics uh uh computer science and mathematics of biology of chemistry yes those are they condense down like uh uh it's sufficiently general that you can understand both the philosophy and the details but also like you get homework problems and you you get to play with it as much as you would if you were in yep programming stuff yeah and then i'm also suspicious of textbooks honestly because as an example in deep learning uh there's no like amazing textbooks and i feel this changing very quickly i imagine the same is true and say uh synthetic biology and so on these books like the cell are kind of outdated they're still high level like what is the actual real source of truth it's people in wetlabs working with cells yeah you know sequencing genomes and yeah actually working with working with it and uh i don't have that much exposure to that or what that looks like so i still don't fully i'm reading through the cell it's kind of interesting and i'm learning but it's still not sufficient i would say in terms of understanding what it's a clean summarization of the mainstream narrative yeah but you have to learn that before you break out yeah at the the towards the cutting edge yeah but what is the actual process of working with these cells and growing them and incubating them and you know it's kind of like a massive cooking recipes and making sure your self-slows and proliferate and then you're sequencing them running experiments and uh just how that works i think is kind of like the source of truth of at the end of the day what's really useful in terms of creating therapies and so on yeah i wonder what in the future AI textbooks will be because you know there's artificial intelligence the modern approach i actually haven't read if it's come out the recent version the recent there's been a recent addition i also saw there's a signs of deep learning book i'm waiting for textbooks that worth recommending worth reading yeah it's it's tricky because it's like papers and code code code honestly i find papers are quite good i especially like the appendix appendix of any paper as well it's like it's like the most detail he can have it doesn't have to be cohesive connected to anything else you just described me very specific ways of the particular thing yeah many times papers can be actually quite readable not always but sometimes the introduction in the abstract even for someone outside of the field uh not this is not always true and sometimes i think unfortunately scientists use complex terms even when it's not necessary i think that's harmful i think there and there's no reason for that and papers sometimes are longer than they need to be in the in the parts that don't matter yeah appendix would be long but then the paper itself you know look at Einstein make it simple yeah but suddenly i've come across papers i would say say like synthetic biology or something that i thought were quite readable for the abstract and the introduction and then you're reading the rest of it and you don't fully understand but you kind of are getting a gist and i think it's cool what advice you give advice to folks interested in machine learning and research but in general life advice to a young person high school early college about how to have a career they can be proud of or life they can be proud of yeah i think i'm very hesitant to give general advice i think it's really hard i've mentioned like some of the stuff i've mentioned is fairly general i think like focus on just the amount of work you're spending on like a thing uh compare yourself only to yourself not to others that's good i think those are fairly general how do you pick the thing uh you just have like a deep interest in something uh or like try to like find the art max over like the things that you're interested in argmax at that moment and stick with it how do you not get distracted and switch to another thing uh you can if you like um we if you do an argmax repeatedly every week if it doesn't converge it doesn't it's a problem yeah you can like low pass filter yourself in terms of like what has consistently been true for you um but yeah i definitely see how it can be hard but i would say like you're going to work the hardest on the thing that you care about the most uh so low pass filter yourself and really introspect in your past where are the things that gave you energy and what are the things that take an energy away from you concrete examples and usually uh from those concrete examples sometimes parents can emerge i like i like it when things look like this when i'm these positions so that's not necessarily the field but the kind of stuff you're doing in a particular field so for you it seems like you were energized by implementing stuff building actual things yeah being low level learning and then also uh communicating so that others can go through the same realizations and shortening that gap um because i usually have to do way too much work to understand a thing and then i'm like okay this is actually like okay i think i get it and like why was it so much work it should have been much less work and that gives me a lot of frustration and that's why i sometimes go teach so aside from the teaching you're doing now uh putting out videos uh aside from a potential uh godfather part two with the aji at tesla and beyond uh what does the future phonjak kapati hold have you figured that out yet or no i mean uh as you see through the fog of war that is all of our future um do you do you start seeing silhouettes of what that possible future could look like the consistent thing i've been always interested in for me at least is is ai and um uh that's probably why i'm spending my rest of my life on because i just care about it a lot and i actually care about like many other problems as well like say aging which i basically view as disease and uh i care about that as well but i don't think it's a good idea to go after it specifically i don't actually think that humans will be able to come up with the answer i think the correct thing to do is to ignore those problems and you solve ai and then use that to solve everything else and i think there's a chance that this will work i think it's a very high chance and uh that's kind of like the the way i'm betting at least so when you think about ai are you interested in all kinds of applications all kinds of domains and any domain you focus on will allow you to get insights of the big problem of aji yeah for me is the ultimate meta problem i don't want to work on anyone specific problem there's too many problems so how can you work on all problems simultaneously you solve the meta problem uh which to me is just intelligence and how do you um automate it is there cool small projects like uh archive sanity and and so on that you're thinking about the the the the world the ml world can anticipate there's some always like some fun side projects yeah um archive sanity is one uh yeah basically like there's way too many archive papers how can i organize it and recommend papers and so on uh i transcribed all of your yeah podcasts what is you learn from that experience uh from transcribing the process of like you like consuming audiobooks and and podcasts and so on you know here's a process that achieves um closer to human level performance and annotation yeah well i definitely was like surprised that uh transcription with open-eized whisperer was working so well compared to what i'm familiar with from seri and like a few other systems i guess it worked so well and uh that's what gave me some energy to like try it out and i thought it could be fun to run on podcasts it's kind of not obvious to me why whisperer is so much better compared to anything else because i feel like there should be a lot of incentive for a lot of companies to produce transcription systems and that they've done so over a long time whisperer is not a super exotic model it's a transformer it takes male spectrograms and you know just outputs tokens of text it's not crazy uh the model and everything has been around for a long time i'm not actually 100% sure why it's not obvious to me either it makes me feel like i'm missing something for missing something yeah because there's huge even google and so on youtube transcription yeah yeah it's unclear but some of it is also integrating into a bigger system yeah that so the user interface how's deployed and all that kind of stuff maybe running it as an independent thing is eat much easier like an order magnitude easier than deploying to a large integrated system like youtube transcription or anything like meetings like zoom has transcription that's kind of crappy but creating interface where the text is different individual speakers it's able to um display it in compelling ways run it real time all that kind of stuff maybe that's difficult i with the experience i have because like i'm currently paying quite a bit for human transcription human caption right annotation and like it seems like there's a huge incentive to automate that yeah it's very confusing and i think i mean i don't know if you look at some of the whisper transcripts but they're quite good they're good and especially in tricky cases yeah i've seen uh whisper performance on like super tricky cases and it doesn't credibly well so i don't know apoptia is pretty simple it's like high quality audio and you're speaking usually pretty clearly and so i don't know it uh i don't know what open AI's plans are yeah either but yeah there's always like fun fun projects basically and stable diffusion also is opening up a huge amount of experimentation i would say in the visual realm and generating images and videos and movies ultimately videos now and so that's going to be pretty crazy uh that's going to that's going to almost certainly work and it's going to be really interesting when the cost of content creation is going to fall to zero you used to need a painter for a few months to paint a thing and now it's going to be speak to your phone to get your video so Hollywood will start using it to generate scenes um which completely opens up yeah so you can make a like a movie like avatar eventually for under a million dollars much less maybe just by talking to your phone i mean i know it sounds kind of crazy and then there'd be some voting mechanism like how do you have a like would there be a show on Netflix as generated completely uh automatically uh simultaneously yeah and what does it look like also when you can generate it on demand and it's um and there's infinity of it yeah oh man all the synthetic content i mean it's humbling because we treat ourselves as special for being able to generate art and ideas and all that kind of stuff if that can be done in an automated way by AI yeah i think it's fascinating to me how these uh the predictions of AI and what is going to look like and what's going to be capable of are completely inverted and wrong and sci-fi of 50s and 60s which is just like totally not right they imagine AI as like super calculating the ear-improvers and we're getting things that can talk to you about emotions it can do art it's just like weird are you excited about that feature just AI's like hybrid systems heterogeneous systems of humans and AI's talking about emotions Netflix and chill with an AI system that's where the Netflix thing you watch is also generated by AI i think it's uh it's going to be interesting for sure and i think i'm cautiously optimistic but it's not it's not obvious well the sad thing is your brain and mine developed in a time where before twitter before the before the internet so i wonder people that are born inside of it might have a different experience like i and maybe you can still resist it and the people born now will not well i do feel like humans are extremely malleable yeah and uh you're probably right what is the meaning of life Andre? we we talked about sort of the universe having a conversation with us humans or with the systems we create to try to answer for the universe for the creator of the universe to notice us we're trying to create systems that are loud enough to answer back i don't know if that's the meaning of life that's like meaning of life for some people the first level answer i would say is anyone can choose their own meaning of life because we are conscious entity and it's beautiful um number one uh but uh i do think that like a deeper meaning of life as someone is interested is uh or along the lines of like what the hell is all this and like why and if you look at the into fundamental physics and the quantum field theory and the standard model they're like way it looked very complicated and um there's this like you know 19 free parameter parameters of our universe and like what's going on with all this stuff and why is it here and can i hack it can i work with it is there a message for me am i supposed to create a message and so i think there's some fundamental answers there uh but i think there's actually even like you can't actually like really make dent in those without more time and so to me also there's a big question around just getting more time honestly yeah that's kind of like what i think about quite a bit as well so kind of the ultimate or at least first way to sneak up to the why question is to try to escape uh the system the universe yeah and then for that you sort of uh backtrack and say okay for that it's going to be take a very long time so the why question boils down from an engineering perspective to how do we extend yeah i think that's the question number one practically speaking because you can't uh you're not going to calculate the answer to the deeper questions in time you have and that could be extending your own lifetime or extending just the lifetime of human civilization uh of whoever wants to not many people might not want that uh but i think people who do want that i think um i think it's probably possible uh and i don't i don't know that people fully realize this i kind of feel like people think of death as an inevitable yeah but at the end of the day this is a physical system something's go wrong uh it makes sense why things like this happen evolutionarily speaking and uh there's most certainly interventions that uh that mitigate it i mean that'd be interesting if death is eventually looked at as as uh a fascinating thing that used to happen to humans i don't think it's unlikely i think it's i think it's likely and it's up to our imagination to try to predict what the world without death looks like yes hard to i think the values will completely change could be i don't i don't really buy all these ideas that oh without death there's no meaning there's nothing is i i don't intuitively buy all those arguments i think there's plenty of meaning plenty of things to learn they're interesting exciting i want to know i want to calculate uh i want to improve the condition of all the humans and organisms that are alive at the way we find meaning might change there is a lot of humans probably including myself that finds meaning in the finiteness of things but that doesn't mean that's the only source of meaning yeah i do think many people will will go with that which i think is great i love the idea that people can just choose their own adventure like you you are born as a conscious free entity by default i'd like to think and um you have your amalienable rights for uh life uh in the pursuit of happiness proceed i don't know if you have that in the nature the landscape of happiness you can choose your own adventure mostly and that's not the fully true but i still am pretty sure i'm an NPC but um an NPC can't know it's an NPC there could be different degrees in levels of consciousness i don't think there's a more beautiful way to end it uh andre a year an incredible person i'm really honored you would talk with me everything you've done for the machine learning world for the ai world to just inspire people to educate millions of people it's been it's been great and i can't wait to see what you do next it's been an honor man thank you so much for talking to today awesome thank you thanks for listening to this conversation with andre karpathy to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some words from semial carlin the purpose of models is not to fit the data but to sharpen the question thanks for listening and hope to see you next time